<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>The Tenth Story</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="day-6" epub:type="part">
			<section id="day-6-10" epub:type="chapter">
				<header>
					<h3 epub:type="title">The Tenth Story</h3>
					<p epub:type="bridgehead">Fra Cipolla promiseth certain country folk to show them one of the angel Gabriel’s feathers and finding coals in place thereof, avoucheth these latter to be of those which roasted <abbr>St.</abbr> Lawrence.</p>
				</header>
				<p>Each of the company being now quit of his<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-311" id="noteref-311" epub:type="noteref">311</a> story, Dioneo perceived that it rested with him to tell; whereupon, without awaiting more formal commandment, he began on this wise, silence having first been imposed on those who commended Guido’s pregnant retort: “Charming ladies, albeit I am privileged to speak of that which most liketh me, I purpose not today to depart from the matter whereof you have all very aptly spoken; but, ensuing in your footsteps, I mean to show you how cunningly a friar of the order of <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony, by name Fra Cipolla, contrived with a sudden shift to extricate himself from a snare<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-312" id="noteref-312" epub:type="noteref">312</a> which had been set for him by two young men; nor should it irk you if, for the complete telling of the story, I enlarge somewhat in speaking, an you consider the sun, which is yet amiddleward in the sky.</p>
				<p>Certaldo, as you may have heard, is a burgh of Val d’ Elsa situate in our country, which, small though it be, was once inhabited by gentlemen and men of substance; and thither, for that he found good pasture there, one of the friars of the order of <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony was long used to resort once a year, to get in the alms bestowed by simpletons upon him and his brethren. His name was Fra Cipolla and he was gladly seen there, no less belike, for his name’s sake<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-313" id="noteref-313" epub:type="noteref">313</a> than for other reasons, seeing that these parts produce onions that are famous throughout all Tuscany. This Fra Cipolla was little of person, red-haired and merry of countenance, the jolliest rascal in the world, and to boot, for all he was no scholar, he was so fine a talker and so ready of wit that those who knew him not would not only have esteemed him a great rhetorician, but had avouched him to be Tully himself or may be Quintilian; and he was gossip or friend or well-wisher<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-314" id="noteref-314" epub:type="noteref">314</a> to well nigh everyone in the country.</p>
				<p>One August among others he betook himself thither according to his wont, and on a Sunday morning, all the goodmen and goodwives of the villages around being come to hear mass at the parish church, he came forward, whenas it seemed to him time, and said, ‘Gentlemen and ladies, it is, as you know, your usance to send every year to the poor of our lord Baron <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony of your corn and of your oats, this little and that much, according to his means and his devoutness, to the intent that the blessed <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony may keep watch over your beeves and asses and swine and sheep; and besides this, you use to pay, especially such of you as are inscribed into our company, that small due which is payable once a year. To collect these I have been sent by my superior, to wit, my lord abbot; wherefore, with the blessing of God, you shall, after none, whenas you hear the bells ring, come hither without the church, where I will make preachment to you after the wonted fashion and you shall kiss the cross; moreover, for that I know you all to be great devotees of our lord <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony, I will, as an especial favour show you a very holy and goodly relic, which I myself brought aforetime from the holy lands beyond seas; and that is one of the Angel Gabriel’s feathers, which remained in the Virgin Mary’s chamber, whenas he came to announce to her in Nazareth.’ This said, he broke off and went on with his mass.</p>
				<p>Now, when he said this, there were in the church, among many others, two roguish young fellows, hight one Giovanni del Bragioniera and the other Biagio Pizzini, who, after laughing with one another awhile over Fra Cipolla’s relic, took counsel together, for all they were great friends and cronies of his, to play him some trick in the matter of the feather in question. Accordingly, having learned that he was to dine that morning with a friend of his in the burgh, they went down into the street as soon as they knew him to be at table, and betook themselves to the inn where he had alighted, purposing that Biagio should hold his servant in parley, whilst Giovanni should search his baggage for the feather aforesaid, whatever it might be, and carry it off, to see what he should say to the people of the matter.</p>
				<p>Fra Cipolla had a servant, whom some called Guccio<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-315" id="noteref-315" epub:type="noteref">315</a> Balena,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-316" id="noteref-316" epub:type="noteref">316</a> others Guccio Imbratta<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-317" id="noteref-317" epub:type="noteref">317</a> and yet others Guccia Porco<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-318" id="noteref-318" epub:type="noteref">318</a> and who was such a scurvy knave that Lipo Topo<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-319" id="noteref-319" epub:type="noteref">319</a> never wrought his like, inasmuch as his master used oftentimes to jest of him with his cronies and say, ‘My servant hath in him nine defaults, such that, were one of them in Solomon or Aristotle or Seneca, it would suffice to mar all their worth, all their wit and all their sanctity. Consider, then, what a man he must be, who hath all nine of them and in whom there is neither worth nor wit nor sanctity.’ Being questioned whiles what were these nine defaults and having put them into doggerel rhyme, he would answer, ‘I will tell you. He’s a liar, a sloven, a slugabed; disobedient, neglectful, ill bred; o’erweening, foul-spoken, a dunderhead; beside which he hath divers other peccadilloes, whereof it booteth not to speak. But what is most laughable of all his fashions is that, wherever he goeth, he is still for taking a wife and hiring a house; for, having a big black greasy beard, him-seemeth he is so exceeding handsome and agreeable that he conceiteth himself all the women who see him fall in love with him, and if you let him alone, he would run after them all till he lost his girdle.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-320" id="noteref-320" epub:type="noteref">320</a> Sooth to say, he is of great assistance to me, for that none can ever seek to speak with me so secretly but he must needs hear his share; and if it chance that I be questioned of aught, he is so fearful lest I should not know how to answer, that he straightway answereth for me both Ay and No, as he judgeth sortable.’</p>
				<p>Now Fra Cipolla, in leaving him at the inn, had bidden him look well that none touched his gear, and more particularly his saddlebags, for that therein were the sacred things. But Guccio, who was fonder of the kitchen than the nightingale of the green boughs, especially if he scented some serving-wench there, and who had seen in that of the inn a gross fat cookmaid, undersized and ill-made, with a pair of paps that showed like two manure-baskets and a face like a cadger’s, all sweaty, greasy and smoky, leaving Fra Cipolla’s chamber and all his gear to care for themselves, swooped down upon the kitchen, even as the vulture swoopeth upon carrion, and seating himself by the fire, for all it was August, entered into discourse with the wench in question, whose name was Nuta, telling her that he was by rights a gentleman and had more than nine millions of florins, beside that which he had to give others, which was rather more than less, and that he could do and say God only knew what. Moreover, without regard to his bonnet, whereon was grease enough to have seasoned the caldron of Altopascio,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-321" id="noteref-321" epub:type="noteref">321</a> and his doublet all torn and pieced and enamelled with filth about the collar and under the armpits, with more spots and patches of divers colours than ever had Turkey or India stuffs, and his shoes all broken and hose unsewn, he told her, as he had been the Sieur de Châtillon,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-322" id="noteref-322" epub:type="noteref">322</a> that he meant to clothe her and trick her out anew and deliver her from the wretchedness of abiding with others,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-323" id="noteref-323" epub:type="noteref">323</a> and bring her to hope of better fortune, if without any great wealth in possession, and many other things, which, for all he delivered them very earnestly, all turned to wind and came to nought, as did most of his enterprises.</p>
				<p>The two young men, accordingly, found Guccio busy about Nuta, whereat they were well pleased, for that it spared them half their pains, and entering Fra Cipolla’s chamber, which they found open, the first thing that came under their examination was the saddlebags wherein was the feather. In these they found, enveloped in a great taffetas wrapper, a little casket and opening this latter, discovered therein a parrot’s tail-feather, which they concluded must be that which the friar had promised to show the people of Certaldo. And certes he might lightly cause it to be believed in those days, for that the refinements of Egypt had not yet made their way save into a small part of Tuscany, as they have since done in very great abundance, to the undoing of all Italy; and wherever they may have been some little known, in those parts they were well nigh altogether unknown of the inhabitants; nay the rude honesty of the ancients yet enduring there, not only had they never set eyes on a parrot, but were far from having ever heard tell of such a bird. The young men, then, rejoiced at finding the feather, laid hands on it and not to leave the casket empty, filled it with some coals they saw in a corner of the room and shut it again. Then, putting all things in order as they had found them, they made off in high glee with the feather, without having been seen, and began to await what Fra Cipolli should say, when he found the coals in place thereof.</p>
				<p>The simple men and women who were in the church, hearing that they were to see the Angel Gabriel’s feather after none, returned home, as soon as mass was over, and neighbor telling it to neighbor and gossip to gossip, no sooner had they all dined than so many men and women flocked to the burgh that it would scarce hold them, all looking eagerly to see the aforesaid feather. Fra Cipolla, having well dined and after slept awhile, arose a little after none and hearing of the great multitude of country folk come to see the feather, sent to bid Guccio Imbratta come thither with the bells and bring his saddlebags. Guccio, tearing himself with difficulty away from the kitchen and Nuta, betook himself with the things required to the appointed place, whither coming, out of breath, for that the water he had drunken had made his belly swell amain, he repaired, by his master’s commandment, to the church door and fell to ringing the bells lustily.</p>
				<p>When all the people were assembled there, Fra Cipolla, without observing that aught of his had been meddled with, began his preachment and said many words anent his affairs; after which, thinking to come to the showing of the Angel Gabriel’s feather, he first recited the Confiteor with the utmost solemnity and let kindle a pair of flambeaux; then, pulling off his bonnet, he delicately unfolded the taffetas wrapper and brought out the casket. Having first pronounced certain ejaculations in praise and commendation of the Angel Gabriel and of his relic, he opened the casket and seeing it full of coals, suspected not Guccio Balena of having played him this trick, for that he knew him not to be man enough; nor did he curse him for having kept ill watch lest others should do it, but silently cursed himself for having committed to him the care of his gear, knowing him, as he did, to be negligent, disobedient, careless and forgetful.</p>
				<p>Nevertheless, without changing colour, he raised his eyes and hands to heaven and said, so as to be heard of all, ‘O God, praised be still thy puissance!’ Then, shutting the casket and turning to the people, ‘Gentlemen and ladies,’ quoth he, ‘you must know that, whilst I was yet very young, I was dispatched by my superior to those parts where the sun riseth and it was expressly commanded me that I should seek till I found the Privileges of Porcellana, which, though they cost nothing to seal, are much more useful to others than to us. On this errand I set out from Venice and passed through Borgo de’ Greci,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-324" id="noteref-324" epub:type="noteref">324</a> whence, riding through the kingdom of Algarve and Baldacca,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-325" id="noteref-325" epub:type="noteref">325</a> I came to Parione,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-326" id="noteref-326" epub:type="noteref">326</a> and from there, not without thirst, I came after awhile into Sardinia. But what booteth it to set out to you in detail all the lands explored by me? Passing the straits of San Giorgio,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-327" id="noteref-327" epub:type="noteref">327</a> I came into Truffia<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-328" id="noteref-328" epub:type="noteref">328</a> and Buffia,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-329" id="noteref-329" epub:type="noteref">329</a> countries much inhabited and with great populations, and thence into the land of Menzogna,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-330" id="noteref-330" epub:type="noteref">330</a> where I found great plenty of our brethren and of friars of other religious orders, who all went about those parts, shunning unease for the love of God, recking little of others’ travail, whenas they saw their own advantage to ensue, and spending none other money than such as was uncoined.<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-331" id="noteref-331" epub:type="noteref">331</a> Thence I passed into the land of the Abruzzi, where the men and women go in clogs over the mountains, clothing the swine in their own guts;<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-332" id="noteref-332" epub:type="noteref">332</a> and a little farther I found folk who carried bread on sticks and wine in bags. From this I came to the Mountains of the Bachi, where all the waters run down hill; and in brief, I made my way so far inward that I won at last even to India Pastinaca,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-333" id="noteref-333" epub:type="noteref">333</a> where I swear to you, by the habit I wear on my back, that I saw hedge-bills<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-334" id="noteref-334" epub:type="noteref">334</a> fly, a thing incredible to whoso hath not seen it. But of this Maso del Saggio will confirm me, whom I found there a great merchant, cracking walnuts and selling the shells by retail.</p>
				<p>Being unable to find that which I went seeking, for that thence one goeth thither by water, I turned back and arrived in those holy countries, where, in summer-years, cold bread is worth four farthings a loaf and the hot goeth for nothing. There I found the venerable father my lord Blamemenot Anitpleaseyou, the very worshipful Patriarch of Jerusalem, who, for reverence of the habit I have still worn of my lord Baron <abbr>St.</abbr> Anthony, would have me see all the holy relics that he had about him and which were so many that, an I sought to recount them all to you, I should not come to an end thereof in several miles. However, not to leave you disconsolate, I will tell you some thereof. First, he showed me the finger of the Holy Ghost, as whole and sound as ever it was, and the forelock of the seraph that appeared to <abbr>St.</abbr> Francis and one of the nails of the Cherubim and one of the ribs of the Verbum Caro<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-335" id="noteref-335" epub:type="noteref">335</a> Get-thee-to-the-windows and some of the vestments of the Holy Catholic Faith and divers rays of the star that appeared to the Three Wise Men in the East and a vial of the sweat of <abbr>St.</abbr> Michael, whenas he fought with the devil, and the jawbone of the death of <abbr>St.</abbr> Lazarus and others. And for that I made him a free gift of the Steeps<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-336" id="noteref-336" epub:type="noteref">336</a> of Monte Morello in the vernacular and of some chapters of the Caprezio,<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-337" id="noteref-337" epub:type="noteref">337</a> which he had long gone seeking, he made me a sharer in his holy relics and gave me one of the teeth of the Holy Rood and somewhat of the sound of the bells of Solomon’s Temple in a vial and the feather of the Angel Gabriel, whereof I have already bespoken you, and one of the pattens of <abbr>St.</abbr> Gherardo da Villa Magna, which not long since at Florence I gave to Gherardo di Bonsi, who hath a particular devotion for that saint; and he gave me also of the coals wherewith the most blessed martyr <abbr>St.</abbr> Lawrence was roasted; all which things I devoutly brought home with me and yet have. True it is that my superior hath never suffered me to show them till such time as he should be certified if they were the very things or not. But now that, by certain miracles performed by them and by letters received from the patriarch, he hath been made certain of this, he hath granted me leave to show them; and I, fearing to trust them to others, still carry them with me.</p>
				<p>Now I carry the Angel Gabriel’s feather, so it may not be marred, in one casket, and the coals wherewith <abbr>St.</abbr> Lawrence was roasted in another, the which are so like one to other, that it hath often happened to me to take one for the other, and so hath it betided me at this present, for that, thinking to bring hither the casket wherein was the feather, I have brought that wherein are the coals. The which I hold not to have been an error; nay, meseemeth certain that it was God’s will and that He Himself placed the casket with the coals in my hands, especially now I mind me that the feast of <abbr>St.</abbr> Lawrence is but two days hence; wherefore God, willing that, by showing you the coals wherewith he was roasted, I should rekindle in your hearts the devotion it behoveth you have for him, caused me take, not the feather, as I purposed, but the blessed coals extinguished by the sweat of that most holy body. So, O my blessed children, put off your bonnets and draw near devoutly to behold them; but first I would have you knew that whoso is scored with these coals, in the form of the sign of the cross, may rest assured, for the whole year to come, that fire shall not touch him but he shall feel it.’</p>
				<p>Having thus spoken, he opened the casket, chanting the while a canticle in praise of <abbr>St.</abbr> Lawrence, and showed the coals, which after the simple multitude had awhile beheld with reverent admiration, they all crowded about Fra Cipolla and making him better offerings than they were used, besought him to touch them withal. Accordingly, taking the coals in hand, he fell to making the biggest crosses for which he could find room upon their white smocks and doublets and upon the veils of the women, avouching that how much soever the coals diminished in making these crosses, they after grew again in the casket, as he had many a time proved. On this wise he crossed all the people of Certaldo, to his no small profit, and thus, by his ready wit and presence of mind, he baffled those who, by taking the feather from him, had thought to baffle him and who, being present at his preachment and hearing the rare shift employed by him and from how far he had taken it and with what words, had so laughed that they thought to have cracked their jaws. Then, after the common folk had departed, they went up to him and with all the mirth in the world discovered to him that which they had done and after restored him his feather, which next year stood him in as good stead as the coals had done that day.”</p>
				<hr/>
				<p>This story afforded unto all the company alike the utmost pleasure and solace, and it was much laughed of all at Fra Cipolla, and particularly of his pilgrimage and the relics seen and brought back by him. The queen, seeing the story and likewise her sovantry at an end, rose to her feet and put off the crown, which she set laughingly on Dioneo’s head, saying, “It is time, Dioneo, that thou prove awhile what manner charge it is to have ladies to govern and guide; be thou, then, king and rule on such wise that, in the end, we may have reason to give ourselves joy of thy governance.” Dioneo took the crown and answered, laughing, “You may often enough have seen much better kings than I, I mean chess-kings; but, an you obey me as a king should in truth be obeyed, I will cause you enjoy that without which assuredly no entertainment is ever complete in its gladness. But let that talk be; I will rule as best I know.”</p>
				<p>Then, sending for the seneschal, according to the wonted usance, he orderly enjoined him of that which he should do during the continuance of his seignory and after said, “Noble ladies, it hath in divers manners been devised of human industry<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-338" id="noteref-338" epub:type="noteref">338</a> and of the various chances [of fortune,] insomuch that, had not Dame Licisca come hither a while agone and found me matter with her prate for our morrow’s relations, I misdoubt me I should have been long at pains to find a subject of discourse. As you heard, she avouched that she had not a single gossip who had come to her husband a maid and added that she knew right well how many and what manner tricks married women yet played their husbands. But, letting be the first part, which is a childish matter, methinketh the second should be an agreeable subject for discourse; wherefore I will and ordain it that, since Licisca hath given us occasion therefor, it be discoursed tomorrow <b>of the tricks which, or for love or for their own preservation, women have heretofore played their husbands, with or without the latter’s cognizance thereof</b>.”</p>
				<p>It seemed to some of the ladies that to discourse of such a matter would ill beseem them and they prayed him, therefore, to change the theme proposed; wherefore answered he, “Ladies, I am no less cognizant than yourselves of that which I have ordained, and that which you would fain allege to me availed not to deter me from ordaining it, considering that the times are such that, provided men and women are careful to eschew unseemly actions, all liberty of discourse is permitted. Know you not that, for the malignity of the season, the judges have forsaken the tribunals, that the laws, as well Divine as human, are silent and full licence is conceded unto everyone for the preservation of his life? Wherefore, if your modesty allow itself some little freedom in discourse, not with intent to ensue it with aught of unseemly in deeds, but to afford yourselves and others diversion, I see not with what plausible reason any can blame you in the future. Moreover, your company, from the first day of our assembling until this present, hath been most decorous, nor, for aught that hath been said here, doth it appear to me that its honour hath anywise been sullied. Again, who is there knoweth not your virtue? Which, not to say mirthful discourse, but even fear of death I do not believe could avail to shake. And to tell you the truth, whosoever should hear that you shrank from devising bytimes of these toys would be apt to suspect that you were guilty in the matter and were therefore unwilling to discourse thereof. To say nothing of the fine honour you would do me in that, I having been obedient unto all, you now, having made me your king, seek to lay down the law to me, and not to discourse of the subject which I propose. Put off, then, this misdoubtance, apter to mean minds than to yours, and good luck to you, let each of you bethink herself of some goodly story to tell.” When the ladies heard this, they said it should be as he pleased; whereupon he gave them all leave to do their several pleasures until suppertime.</p>
				<p>The sun was yet high, for that the discoursement<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-339" id="noteref-339" epub:type="noteref">339</a> had been brief; wherefor Dioneo having addressed himself to play at tables with the other young men, Elisa called the other ladies apart and said to them, “Since we have been here, I have still wished to carry you to a place very near at hand, whither methinketh none of you hath ever been and which is called the Ladies’ Valley, but have never yet found an occasion of bringing you thither unto today; wherefore, as the sun is yet high, I doubt not but, an it please you come thither, you will be exceeding well pleased to have been there.” They answered that they were ready and calling one of their maids, set out upon their way, without letting the young men know aught thereof; nor had they gone much more than a mile, when they came to the Ladies’ Valley. They entered therein by a very strait way, on one side whereof ran a very clear streamlet, and saw it as fair and as delectable, especially at that season whenas the heat was great, as most might be conceived. According to that which one of them after told me, the plain that was in the valley was as round as if it had been traced with the compass, albeit it seemed the work of nature and not of art, and was in circuit a little more than half a mile, encompassed about with six little hills not over-high, on the summit of each of which stood a palace builded in guise of a goodly castle. The sides of these hills went sloping gradually downward to the plain on such wise as we see in amphitheatres, the degrees descend in ordered succession from the highest to the lowest, still contracting their circuit; and of these slopes those which looked toward the south were all full of vines and olives and almonds and cherries and figs and many another kind of fruit-bearing trees, without a span thereof being wasted; whilst those which faced the North Star<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-340" id="noteref-340" epub:type="noteref">340</a> were all covered with thickets of dwarf oaks and ashes and other trees as green and straight as might be. The middle plain, which had no other inlet than that whereby the ladies were come thither, was full of firs and cypresses and laurels and various sorts of pines, as well arrayed and ordered as if the best artist in that kind had planted them; and between these little or no sun, even at its highest, made its way to the ground, which was all one meadow of very fine grass, thick-sown with flowers purpurine and others. Moreover, that which afforded no less delight than otherwhat was a little stream, which ran down from a valley that divided two of the hills aforesaid and falling over cliffs of live rock, made a murmur very delectable to hear, what while it showed from afar, as it broke over the stones, like so much quicksilver jetting out, under pressure of somewhat, into fine spray. As it came down into the little plain, it was there received into a fair channel and ran very swiftly into the middest thereof, where it formed a lakelet, such as the townsfolk made whiles, by way of fishpond, in their gardens, whenas they have a commodity thereof. This lakelet was no deeper than a man’s stature, breast high, and its waters being exceeding clear and altogether untroubled with any admixture, it showed its bottom to be of a very fine gravel, the grains whereof whoso had nought else to do might, an he would, have availed to number; nor, looking into the water, was the bottom alone to be seen, nay, but so many fish fleeting hither and thither that, over and above the pleasure thereof, it was a marvel to behold; nor was it enclosed with other banks than the very soil of the meadow, which was the goodlier thereabout in so much as it received the more of its moisture. The water that abounded over and above the capacity of the lake was received into another channel, whereby, issuing forth of the little valley, it ran off into the lower parts.</p>
				<p>Hither then came the young ladies and after they had gazed all about and much commended the place, they took counsel together to bathe, for that the heat was great and that they saw the lakelet before them and were in no fear of being seen. Accordingly, bidding their serving maid abide over against the way whereby one entered there and look if any should come and give them notice thereof, they stripped themselves naked, all seven, and entered the lake, which hid their white bodies no otherwise than as a thin glass would do with a vermeil rose. Then, they being therein and no troubling of the water ensuing thereof, they fell, as best they might, to faring hither and thither in pursuit of the fish, which had uneath where to hide themselves, and seeking to take them with the naked hand. After they had abidden awhile in such joyous pastime and had taken some of the fish, they came forth of the lakelet and clad themselves anew. Then, unable to commend the place more than they had already done and themseeming time to turn homeward, they set out, with soft step, upon their way, discoursing much of the goodliness of the valley.</p>
				<p>They reached the palace betimes and there found the young men yet at play where they had left them; to whom quoth Pampinea, laughing. “We have e’en stolen a march on you today.” “How?” asked Dioneo. “Do you begin to do deeds ere you come to say words?”<a href="endnotes.xhtml#note-341" id="noteref-341" epub:type="noteref">341</a> “Ay, my lord,” answered she and related to him at large whence they came and how the place was fashioned and how far distant thence and that which they had done. The king, hearing tell of the goodliness of the place and desirous of seeing it, caused straightway order the supper, which being dispatched to the general satisfaction, the three young men, leaving the ladies, betook themselves with their servants to the valley and having viewed it in every part, for that none of them had ever been there before, extolled it for one of the goodliest things in the world. Then, for that it grew late, after they had bathed and donned their clothes, they returned home, where they found the ladies dancing a round, to the accompaniment of a song sung by Fiammetta.</p>
				<p>The dance ended, they entered with them into a discourse of the Ladies’ Valley and said much in praise and commendation thereof. Moreover, the king, sending for the seneschal, bade him look that the dinner be made ready there on the following morning and have sundry beds carried thither, in case any should have a mind to lie or sleep there for nooning; after which he let bring lights and wine and confections and the company having somedele refreshed themselves, he commanded that all should address themselves to dancing. Then, Pamfilo having, at his commandment, set up a dance, the king turned to Elisa and said courteously to her, “Fair damsel, thou has today done me the honour of the crown and I purpose this evening to do thee that of the song; wherefore look thou sing such an one as most liketh thee.” Elisa answered, smiling, that she would well and with dulcet voice began on this wise:</p>
				<blockquote epub:type="z3998:song">
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Love, from thy clutches could I but win free,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Hardly, methinks, again</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Shall any other hook take hold on me.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">I entered in thy wars a youngling maid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Thinking thy strife was utmost peace and sweet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And all my weapons on the ground I laid,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">As one secure, undoubting of defeat;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">But thou, false tyrant, with rapacious heat,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Didst fall on me amain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>With all the grapnels of thine armoury.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">Then, wound about and fettered with thy chains,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">To him, who for my death in evil hour</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Was born, thou gav’st me, bounden, full of pains</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">And bitter tears; and syne within his power</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">He hath me and his rule’s so harsh and dour</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">No sighs can move the swain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nor all my wasting plaints to set me free.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">My prayers, the wild winds bear them all away;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">He hearkeneth unto none and none will hear;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Wherefore each hour my torment waxeth aye;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">I cannot die, albeit life irks me drear.</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Ah, Lord, have pity on my heavy cheer;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Do that I seek in vain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And give him bounden in thy chains to me.</span>
					</p>
					<p>
						<span class="i1">An this thou wilt not, at the least undo</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">The bonds erewhen of hope that knitted were;</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">Alack, O Lord, thereof to thee I sue,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">For, an thou do it, yet to waxen fair</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i2">Again I trust, as was my use whilere,</span>
						<br/>
						<span class="i1">And being quit of pain</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Myself with white flowers and with red besee.</span>
					</p>
				</blockquote>
				<p>Elisa ended her song with a very plaintive sigh, and albeit all marvelled at the words thereof, yet was there none who might conceive what it was that caused her sing thus. But the king, who was in a merry mood, calling for Tindaro, bade him bring out his bagpipes, to the sound whereof he let dance many dances; after which, a great part of the night being now past, he bade each go sleep.</p>
				<hr/>
				<p class="endofday">Here endeth the Sixth Day of the Decameron.</p>
			</section>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
