<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="endnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_1_1" name="Footnote_1_1"/><a href="#FNanchor_1_1"><span class="label">[1]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> those not in love.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_2_2" name="Footnote_2_2"/><a href="#FNanchor_2_2"><span class="label">[2]</span></a> Syn. adventures (<i><span lang="it">casi</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_3_3" name="Footnote_3_3"/><a href="#FNanchor_3_3"><span class="label">[3]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the few pages of which he speaks above.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_4_4" name="Footnote_4_4"/><a href="#FNanchor_4_4"><span class="label">[4]</span></a> Syn. provisions made or means taken (<i><span lang="it">consigli dati</span></i>). Boccaccio constantly uses <i><span lang="it">consiglio</span></i> in this latter sense.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_5_5" name="Footnote_5_5"/><a href="#FNanchor_5_5"><span class="label">[5]</span></a> Syn. help, remedy.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_6_6" name="Footnote_6_6"/><a href="#FNanchor_6_6"><span class="label">[6]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Accidente</span></i>, what a modern physician would call "complication." "Symptom" does not express the whole meaning of the Italian word.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_7_7" name="Footnote_7_7"/><a href="#FNanchor_7_7"><span class="label">[7]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> aromatic drugs.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_8_8" name="Footnote_8_8"/><a href="#FNanchor_8_8"><span class="label">[8]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> gravediggers (<i><span lang="it">becchini</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_9_9" name="Footnote_9_9"/><a href="#FNanchor_9_9"><span class="label">[9]</span></a> Lit. <i>four</i> or six. This is the equivalent Italian idiom.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_10_10" name="Footnote_10_10"/><a href="#FNanchor_10_10"><span class="label">[10]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> but few tapers.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_11_11" name="Footnote_11_11"/><a href="#FNanchor_11_11"><span class="label">[11]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> expectation of gain from acting as tenders of the sick, gravediggers, etc. The word <i><span lang="it">speranza</span></i> is, however, constantly used by Dante and his follower Boccaccio in the contrary sense of "fear," and may be so meant in the present instance.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_12_12" name="Footnote_12_12"/><a href="#FNanchor_12_12"><span class="label">[12]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the cross.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_13_13" name="Footnote_13_13"/><a href="#FNanchor_13_13"><span class="label">[13]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> walled burghs.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_14_14" name="Footnote_14_14"/><a href="#FNanchor_14_14"><span class="label">[14]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> in miniature.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_15_15" name="Footnote_15_15"/><a href="#FNanchor_15_15"><span class="label">[15]</span></a> Or character (<i><span lang="it">qualità</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_16_16" name="Footnote_16_16"/><a href="#FNanchor_16_16"><span class="label">[16]</span></a> I know of no explanation of these names by the commentators, who seem, indeed, after the manner of their kind, to have generally confined themselves to the elaborate illustration and elucidation (or rather, alas! too often, obscuration) of passages already perfectly plain, leaving the difficult passages for the most part untouched. The following is the best I can make of them. <i>Pampinea</i> appears to be formed from the Greek <span lang="el" title="Greek: pan">πᾶν</span>, all, and <span lang="el" title="Greek: pinuô">πινύω</span>, I advise, admonish or inform, and to mean all-advising or admonishing, which would agree well enough with the character of Pampinea, who is represented as the eldest and sagest of the female personages of the Decameron and as taking the lead in everything. <i>Fiammetta</i> is the name by which Boccaccio designates his mistress, the Princess Maria of Naples (the lady for whom he cherished "the very high and noble passion" of which he speaks in his Proem), in his earlier opuscule, the "<span lang="it">Elégia di Madonna Fiammetta</span>," describing, in her name, the torments of separation from the beloved. In this work he speaks of himself under the name of Pamfilo (Gr. <span lang="el" title="Greek: pan">πᾶν</span>, all, and <span lang="el" title="Greek: phileô">φιλέω</span>, I love, <i>i.e.</i> the all-loving or the passionate lover), and it is probable, therefore, that under these names he intended to introduce his royal ladylove and himself in the present work. <i>Filomena</i> (Italian form of Philomela, a nightingale, Greek <span lang="el" title="Greek: philos">φίλος</span> loving, and <span lang="el" title="Greek: melos">μελός</span>, melody, song, <i>i.e.</i> song-loving) is perhaps so styled for her love of music, and <i>Emilia's</i> character, as it appears in the course of the work, justifies the derivation of her name from the Greek <span lang="el" title="Greek: aimylios">αἱμύλιος</span>, pleasing, engaging in manners and behaviour, cajoling. <i>Lauretta</i> Boccaccio probably intends us to look upon as a learned lady, if, as we may suppose, her name is a corruption of <i><span lang="it">laureata</span></i>, laurel-crowned; whilst <i>Neifile's</i> name (Greek <span lang="el" title="Greek: neios">νεῖος</span> [<span lang="el" title="Greek: neos">νεός</span>] new, and <span lang="el" title="Greek: phileô">φιλέω</span>, I love, <i>i.e.</i> novelty-loving) stamps her as being of a somewhat curious disposition, eager "to tell or to hear some new thing." The name <i>Elisa</i> is not so easily to be explained as the others; possibly it was intended by the author as a reminiscence of Dido, to whom the name (which is by some authorities explained to mean "Godlike," from a Hebrew root) is said to have been given "<span lang="la">quòd plurima supra animi muliebris fortitudinem gesserit</span>." It does not, however, appear that there was in Elisa's character or life anything to justify the implied comparison.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_17_17" name="Footnote_17_17"/><a href="#FNanchor_17_17"><span class="label">[17]</span></a> This phrase may also be read "persuading themselves that that (<i>i.e.</i> their breach of the laws of obedience, etc.) beseemeth them and is forbidden only to others" (<i><span lang="it">faccendosi a credere che quello a lor si convenga e non si disdica che all' altre</span></i>); but the reading in the text appears more in harmony with the general sense and is indeed indicated by the punctuation of the Giunta Edition of 1527, which I generally follow in case of doubt.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_18_18" name="Footnote_18_18"/><a href="#FNanchor_18_18"><span class="label">[18]</span></a> Syn. cooler.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_19_19" name="Footnote_19_19"/><a href="#FNanchor_19_19"><span class="label">[19]</span></a> See ante, p. <a href="#Page_8">8</a>, note.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_20_20" name="Footnote_20_20"/><a href="#FNanchor_20_20"><span class="label">[20]</span></a> <i>Filostrato</i>, Greek <span lang="el" title="Greek: philos">φίλος</span>, loving, and <span lang="el" title="Greek: stratos">στρατὸς</span>, army, <i>met.</i> strife, war, <i>i.e.</i> one who loves strife. This name appears to be a reminiscence of Boccaccio's poem (<i><span lang="it">Il Filostrato</span></i>, well known through its translation by Chaucer and the Senechal d'Anjou) upon the subject of the loves of Troilus and Cressida and to be in this instance used by him as a synonym for an unhappy lover, whom no rebuffs, no treachery can divert from his ill-starred passion. Such a lover may well be said to be in love with strife, and that the Filostrato of the Decameron sufficiently answers to this description we learn later on from his own lips.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_21_21" name="Footnote_21_21"/><a href="#FNanchor_21_21"><span class="label">[21]</span></a> <i>Dioneo</i>, a name probably coined from the Greek <span lang="el" title="Greek: Diônê">Διωνη</span>, one of the <i>agnomina</i> of Venus (properly her mother's name) and intended to denote the amorous temperament of his personage, to which, indeed, the erotic character of most of the stories told by him bears sufficient witness.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_22_22" name="Footnote_22_22"/><a href="#FNanchor_22_22"><span class="label">[22]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">e prima mandato là dove</span></i>, etc. This passage is obscure and may be read to mean "and having first despatched [a messenger] (or sent [word]) whereas," etc. I think, however, that <i><span lang="it">mandato</span></i> is a copyist's error for <i><span lang="it">mandata</span></i>, in which case the meaning would be as in the text.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_23_23" name="Footnote_23_23"/><a href="#FNanchor_23_23"><span class="label">[23]</span></a> Or balconies (<i><span lang="it">loggie</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_24_24" name="Footnote_24_24"/><a href="#FNanchor_24_24"><span class="label">[24]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Nine o'clock a.m. Boccaccio's habit of measuring time by the canonical hours has been a sore stumbling-block to the ordinary English and French translator, who is generally terribly at sea as to his meaning, inclining to render <i>tierce</i> three, <i>sexte</i> six o'clock and <i>none</i> noon and making shots of the same wild kind at the other hours. The monasterial rule (which before the general introduction of clocks was commonly followed by the mediæval public in the computation of time) divided the twenty-four hours of the day and night into seven parts (six of three hours each and one of six), the inception of which was denoted by the sound of the bells that summoned the clergy to the performance of the seven canonical offices <i>i.e.</i> <i>Matins</i> at 3 a.m., <i>Prime</i> at 6 a.m., <i>Tierce</i> at 9 a.m., <i>Sexte</i> or Noonsong at noon, <i>None</i> at 3 p.m., <i>Vespers</i> or Evensong at 6 p.m. and <i>Complines</i> or Nightsong at 9 p.m., and at the same time served the laity as a clock.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_25_25" name="Footnote_25_25"/><a href="#FNanchor_25_25"><span class="label">[25]</span></a> The table of Boccaccio's time was a mere board upon trestles, which when not in actual use, was stowed away, for room's sake, against the wall.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_26_26" name="Footnote_26_26"/><a href="#FNanchor_26_26"><span class="label">[26]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to take the siesta or midday nap common in hot countries.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_27_27" name="Footnote_27_27"/><a href="#FNanchor_27_27"><span class="label">[27]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> three o'clock p.m.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_28_28" name="Footnote_28_28"/><a href="#FNanchor_28_28"><span class="label">[28]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> backgammon.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_29_29" name="Footnote_29_29"/><a href="#FNanchor_29_29"><span class="label">[29]</span></a> Or procurators.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_30_30" name="Footnote_30_30"/><a href="#FNanchor_30_30"><span class="label">[30]</span></a> A Florentine merchant settled in France; he had great influence over Philippe le Bel and made use of the royal favour to enrich himself by means of monopolies granted at the expense of his compatriots.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_31_31" name="Footnote_31_31"/><a href="#FNanchor_31_31"><span class="label">[31]</span></a> Charles, Comte de Valois et d'Alençon.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_32_32" name="Footnote_32_32"/><a href="#FNanchor_32_32"><span class="label">[32]</span></a> Philippe le Bel, <span class="smcap">a.d.</span> 1268-1314.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_33_33" name="Footnote_33_33"/><a href="#FNanchor_33_33"><span class="label">[33]</span></a> The Eighth.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_34_34" name="Footnote_34_34"/><a href="#FNanchor_34_34"><span class="label">[34]</span></a> Sic. <i><span lang="it">Cepparello</span></i> means a log or stump. Ciapperello is apparently a dialectic variant of the same word.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_35_35" name="Footnote_35_35"/><a href="#FNanchor_35_35"><span class="label">[35]</span></a> Diminutive of Cappello. This passage is obscure and most likely corrupt. Boccaccio probably meant to write "hat" instead of "chaplet" (<i><span lang="it">ghirlanda</span></i>), as the meaning of <i><span lang="it">cappello</span></i>, chaplet (diminutive of Old English <i>chapel</i>, a hat,) being the meaning of <i><span lang="it">ciappelletto</span></i> (properly <i><span lang="it">cappelletto</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_36_36" name="Footnote_36_36"/><a href="#FNanchor_36_36"><span class="label">[36]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> false instruments.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_37_37" name="Footnote_37_37"/><a href="#FNanchor_37_37"><span class="label">[37]</span></a> A "twopence-coloured" sketch of an impossible villain, drawn with a crudeness unusual in Boccaccio.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_38_38" name="Footnote_38_38"/><a href="#FNanchor_38_38"><span class="label">[38]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> if there be such a thing as a holy and worthy friar.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_39_39" name="Footnote_39_39"/><a href="#FNanchor_39_39"><span class="label">[39]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> <span lang="la">ex voto</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_40_40" name="Footnote_40_40"/><a href="#FNanchor_40_40"><span class="label">[40]</span></a> It will be noted that this is Boccaccio's third variant of his hero's name (the others being Ciapperello and Cepparello) and the edition of 1527 furnishes us with a fourth and a fifth form <i>i.e.</i> Ciepparello and Ciepperello.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_41_41" name="Footnote_41_41"/><a href="#FNanchor_41_41"><span class="label">[41]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> a story.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_42_42" name="Footnote_42_42"/><a href="#FNanchor_42_42"><span class="label">[42]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> of God's benignness.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_43_43" name="Footnote_43_43"/><a href="#FNanchor_43_43"><span class="label">[43]</span></a> Lit. cardinal brethren (<i><span lang="it">fratelli cardinali</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_44_44" name="Footnote_44_44"/><a href="#FNanchor_44_44"><span class="label">[44]</span></a> Lit. losing (<i><span lang="it">perdendo</span></i>), but this is probably some copyist's mistake for <i><span lang="it">podendo</span></i>, the old form of <i><span lang="it">potendo</span></i>, availing.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_45_45" name="Footnote_45_45"/><a href="#FNanchor_45_45"><span class="label">[45]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> stood sponsor for him.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_46_46" name="Footnote_46_46"/><a href="#FNanchor_46_46"><span class="label">[46]</span></a> Lit. amorous (<i><span lang="it">amorose</span></i>), but Boccaccio frequently uses <i><span lang="it">amoroso</span></i>, <i><span lang="it">vago</span></i>, and other adjectives, which are now understood in an active or transitive sense only, in their ancient passive or intransitive sense of lovesome, desirable, etc.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_47_47" name="Footnote_47_47"/><a href="#FNanchor_47_47"><span class="label">[47]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Compagne</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> she-companions. Filomena is addressing the female part of the company.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_48_48" name="Footnote_48_48"/><a href="#FNanchor_48_48"><span class="label">[48]</span></a> Lit. his church (<i><span lang="it">sua chiesa</span></i>); but the context seems to indicate that the monastery itself is meant.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_49_49" name="Footnote_49_49"/><a href="#FNanchor_49_49"><span class="label">[49]</span></a> Lit. a pressure or oppression (<i><span lang="it">priemere</span></i>, hod. <i><span lang="it">premere</span></i>, to press or oppress, indicative used as a noun). The monk of course refers to the posture in which he had seen the abbot have to do with the girl, pretending to believe that he placed her on his own breast (instead of mounting on hers) out of a sentiment of humility and a desire to mortify his flesh <i><span lang="la">ipsâ in voluptate</span></i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_50_50" name="Footnote_50_50"/><a href="#FNanchor_50_50"><span class="label">[50]</span></a> An evident allusion to Boccaccio's passion for the Princess Maria, <i>i.e.</i> Fiammetta herself.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_51_51" name="Footnote_51_51"/><a href="#FNanchor_51_51"><span class="label">[51]</span></a> Or standard-bearer.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_52_52" name="Footnote_52_52"/><a href="#FNanchor_52_52"><span class="label">[52]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the One-eyed (syn. <span lang="fr">le myope</span>, the short-sighted, the Italian word [<i><span lang="it">Il Bornio</span></i>] having both meanings), <i>i.e.</i> Philip II. of France, better known as Philip Augustus.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_53_53" name="Footnote_53_53"/><a href="#FNanchor_53_53"><span class="label">[53]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> with sword and whips, a technical term of ecclesiastical procedure, about equivalent to our "with the strong arm of the law."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_54_54" name="Footnote_54_54"/><a href="#FNanchor_54_54"><span class="label">[54]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> a lover of money.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_55_55" name="Footnote_55_55"/><a href="#FNanchor_55_55"><span class="label">[55]</span></a> A notorious drinker of the time.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_56_56" name="Footnote_56_56"/><a href="#FNanchor_56_56"><span class="label">[56]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> money.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_57_57" name="Footnote_57_57"/><a href="#FNanchor_57_57"><span class="label">[57]</span></a> "And every one that hath forsaken houses or brethren or sisters or father or mother or wife or children or lands for my name's sake shall receive an hundredfold and shall inherit everlasting life."—Matthew xix. 29. Boccaccio has garbled the passage for the sake of his point.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_58_58" name="Footnote_58_58"/><a href="#FNanchor_58_58"><span class="label">[58]</span></a> Syn. gluttonous (<i><span lang="it">brodajuola</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_59_59" name="Footnote_59_59"/><a href="#FNanchor_59_59"><span class="label">[59]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> gleemen, minstrels, story-tellers, jugglers and the like, lit. men of court (<i><span lang="it">uomini di corte</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_60_60" name="Footnote_60_60"/><a href="#FNanchor_60_60"><span class="label">[60]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Dinne alcuna cosa</span>.</i> If we take the affix <i><span lang="it">ne</span></i> (thereof, of it), in its other meaning (as dative of <i><span lang="it">noi</span></i>, we), of "to us," this phrase will read "Tell somewhat thereof," <i>i.e.</i> of the cause of thy melancholy.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_61_61" name="Footnote_61_61"/><a href="#FNanchor_61_61"><span class="label">[61]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Latinist.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_62_62" name="Footnote_62_62"/><a href="#FNanchor_62_62"><span class="label">[62]</span></a> Lit. was (<i><span lang="it">era</span></i>); but as Boccaccio puts "can" (<i><span lang="it">possono</span></i>) in the present tense we must either read <i><span lang="it">è</span></i> and <i><span lang="it">possono</span></i> or <i><span lang="it">era</span></i> and <i><span lang="it">potevano</span></i>. The first reading seems the more probable.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_63_63" name="Footnote_63_63"/><a href="#FNanchor_63_63"><span class="label">[63]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> have most power or means of requiting it.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_64_64" name="Footnote_64_64"/><a href="#FNanchor_64_64"><span class="label">[64]</span></a> Fem.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_65_65" name="Footnote_65_65"/><a href="#FNanchor_65_65"><span class="label">[65]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Uomo di corte</span>.</i> This word has been another grievous stumbling block to the French and English translators of Boccaccio, who render it literally "courtier." The reader need hardly be reminded that the minstrel of the middle ages was commonly jester, gleeman and story-teller all in one and in these several capacities was allowed the utmost license of speech. He was generally attached to the court of some king or sovereign prince, but, in default of some such permanent appointment, passed his time in visiting the courts and mansions of princes and men of wealth and liberty, where his talents were likely to be appreciated and rewarded; hence the name <i><span lang="it">uomo di corte</span></i>, "man of court" (not "courtier," which is <i><span lang="it">cortigiano</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_66_66" name="Footnote_66_66"/><a href="#FNanchor_66_66"><span class="label">[66]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> those minstrels.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_67_67" name="Footnote_67_67"/><a href="#FNanchor_67_67"><span class="label">[67]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the noblemen their patrons.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_68_68" name="Footnote_68_68"/><a href="#FNanchor_68_68"><span class="label">[68]</span></a> Syn. penalties, punishments (<i><span lang="it">pene</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_69_69" name="Footnote_69_69"/><a href="#FNanchor_69_69"><span class="label">[69]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Virtù</span></i>, in the old Roman sense of strength, vigour, energy.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_70_70" name="Footnote_70_70"/><a href="#FNanchor_70_70"><span class="label">[70]</span></a> Old form of Margherita.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_71_71" name="Footnote_71_71"/><a href="#FNanchor_71_71"><span class="label">[71]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the base or eatable part of the stem.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_72_72" name="Footnote_72_72"/><a href="#FNanchor_72_72"><span class="label">[72]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> that day.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_73_73" name="Footnote_73_73"/><a href="#FNanchor_73_73"><span class="label">[73]</span></a> See ante, p. <a href="#Page_8">8</a>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_74_74" name="Footnote_74_74"/><a href="#FNanchor_74_74"><span class="label">[74]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the terms of the limitation aforesaid.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_75_75" name="Footnote_75_75"/><a href="#FNanchor_75_75"><span class="label">[75]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> in the mirrored presentment of her own beauty.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_76_76" name="Footnote_76_76"/><a href="#FNanchor_76_76"><span class="label">[76]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Ballatella</span></i>, lit. little dancing song or song made to be sung as an accompaniment to a dance (from <i><span lang="it">ballare</span></i>, to dance). This is the origin of our word ballad.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_77_77" name="Footnote_77_77"/><a href="#FNanchor_77_77"><span class="label">[77]</span></a> Or pretext (<i><span lang="it">titolo</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_78_78" name="Footnote_78_78"/><a href="#FNanchor_78_78"><span class="label">[78]</span></a> Or "having him punished," lit. "causing give him ill luck" (<i><span lang="it">fargli dar la mala ventura</span></i>). This passage, like so many others of the Decameron, is ambiguous and may also be read "themseeming none other had a juster title to do him an ill turn."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_79_79" name="Footnote_79_79"/><a href="#FNanchor_79_79"><span class="label">[79]</span></a> Lit. a story striveth in (draweth) me to be told or to tell itself (<i><span lang="it">a raccontarsi mi tira una novella</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_80_80" name="Footnote_80_80"/><a href="#FNanchor_80_80"><span class="label">[80]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> religious matters (<i><span lang="it">cose cattoliche</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_81_81" name="Footnote_81_81"/><a href="#FNanchor_81_81"><span class="label">[81]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> take things by the first intention, without seeking to refine upon them, or, in English popular phrase, "I do not pretend to see farther through a stone wall than my neighbours."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_82_82" name="Footnote_82_82"/><a href="#FNanchor_82_82"><span class="label">[82]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the aforesaid orison.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_83_83" name="Footnote_83_83"/><a href="#FNanchor_83_83"><span class="label">[83]</span></a> Or "'Twill have been opportunely done of thee."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_84_84" name="Footnote_84_84"/><a href="#FNanchor_84_84"><span class="label">[84]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> our patron saint.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_85_85" name="Footnote_85_85"/><a href="#FNanchor_85_85"><span class="label">[85]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> whose teeth chattered as it were the clapping of a stork's beak.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_86_86" name="Footnote_86_86"/><a href="#FNanchor_86_86"><span class="label">[86]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> after her bath.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_87_87" name="Footnote_87_87"/><a href="#FNanchor_87_87"><span class="label">[87]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to be hanged or, in the equivalent English idiom, to dance upon nothing.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_88_88" name="Footnote_88_88"/><a href="#FNanchor_88_88"><span class="label">[88]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> usury? See post. One of the commentators ridiculously suggests that they were needlemakers, from <i><span lang="it">ago</span></i>, a needle.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_89_89" name="Footnote_89_89"/><a href="#FNanchor_89_89"><span class="label">[89]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the thing is done and cannot be undone; there is no help for it.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_90_90" name="Footnote_90_90"/><a href="#FNanchor_90_90"><span class="label">[90]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> make her a solemn promise of marriage, formally plight her his troth. The ceremony of betrothal was formerly (and still is in certain countries) the most essential part of the marriage rite.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_91_91" name="Footnote_91_91"/><a href="#FNanchor_91_91"><span class="label">[91]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> cannot hope to tell a story presenting more extraordinary shifts from one to the other extreme of human fortune than that of Pampinea.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_92_92" name="Footnote_92_92"/><a href="#FNanchor_92_92"><span class="label">[92]</span></a> The Genoese have the reputation in Italy of being thieves by nature.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_93_93" name="Footnote_93_93"/><a href="#FNanchor_93_93"><span class="label">[93]</span></a> It seems doubtful whether <i><span lang="it">la reggeva diritta</span></i> should not rather be rendered "kept it upright." Boccaccio has a knack, very trying to the translator, of constantly using words in an obscure or strained sense.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_94_94" name="Footnote_94_94"/><a href="#FNanchor_94_94"><span class="label">[94]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> for nothing.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_95_95" name="Footnote_95_95"/><a href="#FNanchor_95_95"><span class="label">[95]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> son of Pietro, as they still say in Lancashire and other northern provinces, "Tom o' Dick" for "Thomas, son of Richard," etc.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_96_96" name="Footnote_96_96"/><a href="#FNanchor_96_96"><span class="label">[96]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> ill hole.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_97_97" name="Footnote_97_97"/><a href="#FNanchor_97_97"><span class="label">[97]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> a member of the Guelph party, as against the Ghibellines or partisans of the Pope.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_98_98" name="Footnote_98_98"/><a href="#FNanchor_98_98"><span class="label">[98]</span></a> Charles d'Anjou, afterwards King of Sicily.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_99_99" name="Footnote_99_99"/><a href="#FNanchor_99_99"><span class="label">[99]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Frederick II. of Germany.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_100_100" name="Footnote_100_100"/><a href="#FNanchor_100_100"><span class="label">[100]</span></a> The reason was that she wished to keep him in play till late into the night, when all the folk should be asleep and she might the lightlier deal with him.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_101_101" name="Footnote_101_101"/><a href="#FNanchor_101_101"><span class="label">[101]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Catalan Street.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_102_102" name="Footnote_102_102"/><a href="#FNanchor_102_102"><span class="label">[102]</span></a> Charles d'Anjou.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_103_103" name="Footnote_103_103"/><a href="#FNanchor_103_103"><span class="label">[103]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the Banished or the Expelled One.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_104_104" name="Footnote_104_104"/><a href="#FNanchor_104_104"><span class="label">[104]</span></a> An island in the Gulf of Gaeta, about 70 miles from Naples. It is now inhabited, but appears in Boccaccio's time to have been desert.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_105_105" name="Footnote_105_105"/><a href="#FNanchor_105_105"><span class="label">[105]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> wild she-goat.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_106_106" name="Footnote_106_106"/><a href="#FNanchor_106_106"><span class="label">[106]</span></a> A river falling into the Gulf of Genoa between Carrara and Spezzia.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_107_107" name="Footnote_107_107"/><a href="#FNanchor_107_107"><span class="label">[107]</span></a> More familiar to modern ears as Doria.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_108_108" name="Footnote_108_108"/><a href="#FNanchor_108_108"><span class="label">[108]</span></a> The Ghibellines were the supporters of the Papal faction against the Guelphs or adherents of the Emperor Frederick II. of Germany. The cardinal struggle between the two factions took place over the succession to the throne of Naples and Sicily, to which the Pope appointed Charles of Anjou, who overcame and killed the reigning sovereign Manfred, but was himself, through the machinations of the Ghibellines, expelled from Sicily by the celebrated popular rising known as the Sicilian Vespers.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_109_109" name="Footnote_109_109"/><a href="#FNanchor_109_109"><span class="label">[109]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Beritola's sons.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_110_110" name="Footnote_110_110"/><a href="#FNanchor_110_110"><span class="label">[110]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to which general joy.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_111_111" name="Footnote_111_111"/><a href="#FNanchor_111_111"><span class="label">[111]</span></a> Pedro of Arragon, son-in-law of Manfred, who, in consequence of the Sicilian Vespers, succeeded Charles d'Anjou as King of Sicily.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_112_112" name="Footnote_112_112"/><a href="#FNanchor_112_112"><span class="label">[112]</span></a> Or (in modern phrase) putting himself at their disposition.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_113_113" name="Footnote_113_113"/><a href="#FNanchor_113_113"><span class="label">[113]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Egypt, Cairo was known in the middle ages by the name of "Babylon of Egypt." It need hardly be noted that the Babylon of the Bible was the city of that name on the Euphrates, the ancient capital of Chaldæa (Irak Babili). The names Beminedab and Alatiel are purely imaginary.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_114_114" name="Footnote_114_114"/><a href="#FNanchor_114_114"><span class="label">[114]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to his wish, to whom fortune was mostly favourable in his enterprises.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_115_115" name="Footnote_115_115"/><a href="#FNanchor_115_115"><span class="label">[115]</span></a> <i>Il Garbo</i>, Arabic El Gherb or Gharb, <span lang="ar" title="Arabic: al gharb"><b>الﻐرب</b></span>, the West, a name given by the Arabs to several parts of the Muslim empire, but by which Boccaccio apparently means Algarve, the southernmost province of Portugal and the last part of that kingdom to succumb to the wave of Christian reconquest, it having remained in the hands of the Muslims till the second half of the thirteenth century. This supposition is confirmed by the course taken by Alatiel's ship, which would naturally pass Sardinia and the Balearic Islands on its way from Alexandria to Portugal.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_116_116" name="Footnote_116_116"/><a href="#FNanchor_116_116"><span class="label">[116]</span></a> The modern Klarentza in the north-west of the Morea, which latter province formed part of Roumelia under the Turkish domination.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_117_117" name="Footnote_117_117"/><a href="#FNanchor_117_117"><span class="label">[117]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> sister to the one and cousin to the other.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p>
					<a id="Footnote_118_118" name="Footnote_118_118"/><a href="#FNanchor_118_118">
						<span class="label">[118]</span>
					</a>
					<i><span lang="it">Non vogando, ma volando</span>.</i>
				</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_119_119" name="Footnote_119_119"/><a href="#FNanchor_119_119"><span class="label">[119]</span></a> Sic (<i><span lang="it">contò tutto</span></i>); but this is an oversight of the author's, as it is evident from what follows that she did <i>not</i> relate everything.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_120_120" name="Footnote_120_120"/><a href="#FNanchor_120_120"><span class="label">[120]</span></a> Lit. Ponant (<i><span lang="it">Ponente</span></i>), <i>i.e.</i> the Western coasts of the Mediterranean, as opposed to the Eastern or Levant.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_121_121" name="Footnote_121_121"/><a href="#FNanchor_121_121"><span class="label">[121]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> <span class="smcap">a.d.</span> 912, when, upon the death of Louis III, the last prince of the Carlovingian race, Conrad, Duke of Franconia, was elected Emperor and the Empire, which had till then been hereditary in the descendants of Charlemagne, became elective and remained thenceforth in German hands.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_122_122" name="Footnote_122_122"/><a href="#FNanchor_122_122"><span class="label">[122]</span></a> <i>Anguersa</i>, the old form of <i>Anversa</i>, Antwerp. All versions that I have seen call Gautier Comte d'<i><span lang="fr">Angers</span></i> or <i><span lang="fr">Angiers</span></i>, the translators, who forgot or were unaware that Antwerp, as part of Flanders, was then a fief of the French crown, apparently taking it for granted that the mention of the latter city was in error and substituting the name of the ancient capital of Anjou on their own responsibility.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_123_123" name="Footnote_123_123"/><a href="#FNanchor_123_123"><span class="label">[123]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> of her excuse.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_124_124" name="Footnote_124_124"/><a href="#FNanchor_124_124"><span class="label">[124]</span></a> Lit. Thou holdest (or judges); but <i><span lang="it">giudichi</span></i> in the text is apparently a mistake for <i><span lang="it">giudico</span></i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_125_125" name="Footnote_125_125"/><a href="#FNanchor_125_125"><span class="label">[125]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> of discernment.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_126_126" name="Footnote_126_126"/><a href="#FNanchor_126_126"><span class="label">[126]</span></a> Sic (<i><span lang="it">aggiunsero</span></i>); but <i><span lang="fr">semble</span></i> should mean "believed, in addition."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_127_127" name="Footnote_127_127"/><a href="#FNanchor_127_127"><span class="label">[127]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> That the secret might be the better kept.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_128_128" name="Footnote_128_128"/><a href="#FNanchor_128_128"><span class="label">[128]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Paesani</span></i>, lit., countrymen; but Boccaccio evidently uses the word in the sense of "vassals."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_129_129" name="Footnote_129_129"/><a href="#FNanchor_129_129"><span class="label">[129]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> that it was not a snare.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_130_130" name="Footnote_130_130"/><a href="#FNanchor_130_130"><span class="label">[130]</span></a> <i><span lang="la">Quære</span></i>, the Count's?</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_131_131" name="Footnote_131_131"/><a href="#FNanchor_131_131"><span class="label">[131]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Rimane</span>.</i> The verb <i><span lang="it">rimanere</span></i> is constantly used by the old Italian writers in the sense of "to become," so that the proverb cited in the text may be read "The deceiver becometh (<i>i.e.</i> findeth himself in the end) at the feet (<i>i.e.</i> at the mercy) of the person deceived."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_132_132" name="Footnote_132_132"/><a href="#FNanchor_132_132"><span class="label">[132]</span></a> Lit. Whatsoever an ass giveth against a wall, such he receiveth (<i><span lang="it">Quale asino da in parete, tal riceve</span></i>). I cannot find any satisfactory explanation of this proverbial saying, which may be rendered in two ways, according as <i><span lang="it">quale</span></i> and <i><span lang="it">tale</span></i> are taken as relative to a thing or a person. The probable reference seems to be to the circumstance of an ass making water against a wall, so that his urine returns to him.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_133_133" name="Footnote_133_133"/><a href="#FNanchor_133_133"><span class="label">[133]</span></a> From this point until the final discovery of her true sex, the heroine is spoken of in the masculine gender, as became her assumed name and habit.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_134_134" name="Footnote_134_134"/><a href="#FNanchor_134_134"><span class="label">[134]</span></a> Here Boccaccio uses the feminine pronoun, immediately afterward resuming the masculine form in speaking of Sicurano.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_135_135" name="Footnote_135_135"/><a href="#FNanchor_135_135"><span class="label">[135]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> her.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_136_136" name="Footnote_136_136"/><a href="#FNanchor_136_136"><span class="label">[136]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> her.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_137_137" name="Footnote_137_137"/><a href="#FNanchor_137_137"><span class="label">[137]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> hers.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_138_138" name="Footnote_138_138"/><a href="#FNanchor_138_138"><span class="label">[138]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> her.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_139_139" name="Footnote_139_139"/><a href="#FNanchor_139_139"><span class="label">[139]</span></a> Sic (<i><span lang="it">meglio</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_140_140" name="Footnote_140_140"/><a href="#FNanchor_140_140"><span class="label">[140]</span></a> Lit. fabulous demonstrations (<i><span lang="it">dimostrazioni favolose</span></i>), casuistical arguments, founded upon premises of their own invention.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_141_141" name="Footnote_141_141"/><a href="#FNanchor_141_141"><span class="label">[141]</span></a> According to one of the commentators of the Decameron, there are as many churches at Ravenna as days in the year and each day is there celebrated as that of some saint or other.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_142_142" name="Footnote_142_142"/><a href="#FNanchor_142_142"><span class="label">[142]</span></a> A trifling jingle upon the similarity in sound of the words <i><span lang="it">mortale</span></i> (mortal), <i><span lang="it">mortaio</span></i> (mortar), <i><span lang="it">pestello</span></i> (pestle), and <i><span lang="it">pestilente</span></i> (pestilential). The same word-play occurs at least once more in the Decameron.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_143_143" name="Footnote_143_143"/><a href="#FNanchor_143_143"><span class="label">[143]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Il mal foro</span></i>, a woman's commodity (Florio).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_144_144" name="Footnote_144_144"/><a href="#FNanchor_144_144"><span class="label">[144]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> <i><span lang="la">Cunnus nonvult feriari</span>.</i> Some commentators propose to read <i><span lang="it">il mal furo</span></i>, the ill thief, supposing Ricciardo to allude to Paganino, but this seems far-fetched.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_145_145" name="Footnote_145_145"/><a href="#FNanchor_145_145"><span class="label">[145]</span></a> <i>i.e. <span lang="fr">semble</span></i> ran headlong to destruction. The commentators explain this proverbial expression by saying that a she-goat is in any case a hazardous mount, and <i><span lang="la">a fortiori</span></i> when ridden down a precipice; but this seems a somewhat "sporting" kind of interpretation.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_146_146" name="Footnote_146_146"/><a href="#FNanchor_146_146"><span class="label">[146]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Friday being a fast day and Saturday a <i><span lang="fr">jour maigre</span></i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_147_147" name="Footnote_147_147"/><a href="#FNanchor_147_147"><span class="label">[147]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> generally upon the vicissitudes of Fortune and not upon any particular feature.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_148_148" name="Footnote_148_148"/><a href="#FNanchor_148_148"><span class="label">[148]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Industria</span></i>, syn. address, skilful contrivance.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_149_149" name="Footnote_149_149"/><a href="#FNanchor_149_149"><span class="label">[149]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> half <i>before</i> (not half <i>after</i>) tierce or 7.30 a.m. <i>Cf.</i> the equivalent German idiom, <i><span lang="de">halb acht</span></i>, 7.30 (not 8.30) a.m.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_150_150" name="Footnote_150_150"/><a href="#FNanchor_150_150"><span class="label">[150]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> as a whole (<i><span lang="it">tutto insieme</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_151_151" name="Footnote_151_151"/><a href="#FNanchor_151_151"><span class="label">[151]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Sollecitudine</span>.</i> The commentators will have it that this is an error for <i><span lang="it">solitudine</span></i>, solitude, but I see no necessity for the substitution, the text being perfectly acceptable as it stands.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_152_152" name="Footnote_152_152"/><a href="#FNanchor_152_152"><span class="label">[152]</span></a> Hortyard (<i><span lang="it">orto</span></i>) is the old form of orchard, properly an enclosed tract of land in which fruit, vegetables and potherbs are cultivated for use, <i>i.e.</i> the modern kitchen garden and orchard in one, as distinguished from the pleasaunce or flower garden (<i><span lang="it">giardino</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_153_153" name="Footnote_153_153"/><a href="#FNanchor_153_153"><span class="label">[153]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Giardino</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> flower-garden.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_154_154" name="Footnote_154_154"/><a href="#FNanchor_154_154"><span class="label">[154]</span></a> Lit. broke the string of.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_155_155" name="Footnote_155_155"/><a href="#FNanchor_155_155"><span class="label">[155]</span></a> Boccaccio calls her <i>Teudelinga</i>; but I know of no authority for this form of the name of the famous Longobardian queen.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_156_156" name="Footnote_156_156"/><a href="#FNanchor_156_156"><span class="label">[156]</span></a> Referring apparently to the adventure related in the present story.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_157_157" name="Footnote_157_157"/><a href="#FNanchor_157_157"><span class="label">[157]</span></a> Lit. with high (<i>i.e.</i> worthy) cause (<i><span lang="it">con alta cagione</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_158_158" name="Footnote_158_158"/><a href="#FNanchor_158_158"><span class="label">[158]</span></a> Lit. (<i><span lang="it">riscaldare gli orecchi</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_159_159" name="Footnote_159_159"/><a href="#FNanchor_159_159"><span class="label">[159]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> three a.m. next morning.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_160_160" name="Footnote_160_160"/><a href="#FNanchor_160_160"><span class="label">[160]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> a lay brother or affiliate.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_161_161" name="Footnote_161_161"/><a href="#FNanchor_161_161"><span class="label">[161]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the canticles of praise chanted by certain lay confraternities, established for that purpose and answering to our præ-Reformation Laudsingers.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_162_162" name="Footnote_162_162"/><a href="#FNanchor_162_162"><span class="label">[162]</span></a> An order of lay penitents, who were wont at certain times to go masked about the streets, scourging themselves in expiation of the sins of the people. This expiatory practice was particularly prevalent in Italy in the middle of the thirteenth century.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_163_163" name="Footnote_163_163"/><a href="#FNanchor_163_163"><span class="label">[163]</span></a> Contraction of Elisabetta.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_164_164" name="Footnote_164_164"/><a href="#FNanchor_164_164"><span class="label">[164]</span></a> <i>Dom</i>, contraction of Dominus (lord), the title commonly given to the beneficed clergy in the middle ages, answering to our <i>Sir</i> as used by Shakespeare (<i>e.g.</i> Sir Hugh Evans the Welsh Parson, Sir Topas the Curate, etc.). The expression survives in the title <i>Dominie</i> (<i>i.e.</i> Domine, voc. of Dominus) still familiarly applied to schoolmasters, who were of course originally invariably clergymen.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_165_165" name="Footnote_165_165"/><a href="#FNanchor_165_165"><span class="label">[165]</span></a> A Conventual is a member of some monastic order attached to the regular service of a church, or (as would nowadays be said) a "beneficed" monk.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_166_166" name="Footnote_166_166"/><a href="#FNanchor_166_166"><span class="label">[166]</span></a> <i>Sic.</i> This confusion of persons constantly occurs in Boccaccio, especially in the conversational parts of the Decameron, in which he makes the freest use of the various forms of enallage and of other rhetorical figures, such as hyperbaton, synecdoche, etc., to the no small detriment of his style in the matter of clearness.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_167_167" name="Footnote_167_167"/><a href="#FNanchor_167_167"><span class="label">[167]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> nine o'clock p.m.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_168_168" name="Footnote_168_168"/><a href="#FNanchor_168_168"><span class="label">[168]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> a gentleman of Pistoia.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_169_169" name="Footnote_169_169"/><a href="#FNanchor_169_169"><span class="label">[169]</span></a> Lit. "The summit," or in modern slang "The tiptop," <i>i.e.</i> the pink of fashion.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_170_170" name="Footnote_170_170"/><a href="#FNanchor_170_170"><span class="label">[170]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> this love shall I bear you. This is a flagrant instance of the misuse of ellipsis, which so frequently disfigures Boccaccio's dialogue.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_171_171" name="Footnote_171_171"/><a href="#FNanchor_171_171"><span class="label">[171]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> my death.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_172_172" name="Footnote_172_172"/><a href="#FNanchor_172_172"><span class="label">[172]</span></a> Syn. a rare or strange means (<i><span lang="it">nuovo consiglio</span></i>). The word <i><span lang="it">nuovo</span></i> is constantly used by Boccaccio in the latter sense, as is <i><span lang="it">consiglio</span></i> in its remoter signification of means, remedy, etc.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_173_173" name="Footnote_173_173"/><a href="#FNanchor_173_173"><span class="label">[173]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the favour.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_174_174" name="Footnote_174_174"/><a href="#FNanchor_174_174"><span class="label">[174]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the lost six months.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_175_175" name="Footnote_175_175"/><a href="#FNanchor_175_175"><span class="label">[175]</span></a> Or, in modern parlance, to enlighten her.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_176_176" name="Footnote_176_176"/><a href="#FNanchor_176_176"><span class="label">[176]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> It was not the dead man, but Tedaldo Elisei whom you loved. (<i><span lang="it">Lo sventurato giovane che fu morto non amasti voi mai, ma Tedaldo Elisei si</span>.</i>)</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_177_177" name="Footnote_177_177"/><a href="#FNanchor_177_177"><span class="label">[177]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> friars' gowns. Boccaccio constantly uses this irregular form of enallage, especially in dialogue.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_178_178" name="Footnote_178_178"/><a href="#FNanchor_178_178"><span class="label">[178]</span></a> Or, as we should nowadays say, "typical."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_179_179" name="Footnote_179_179"/><a href="#FNanchor_179_179"><span class="label">[179]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the founders of the monastic orders.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_180_180" name="Footnote_180_180"/><a href="#FNanchor_180_180"><span class="label">[180]</span></a> Lit. pictures, paintings (<i><span lang="it">dipinture</span></i>), but evidently here used in a tropical sense, Boccaccio's apparent meaning being that the hypocritical friars used to terrify their devotees by picturing to them, in vivid colours, the horrors of the punishment reserved for sinners.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_181_181" name="Footnote_181_181"/><a href="#FNanchor_181_181"><span class="label">[181]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> may not have to labour for their living.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_182_182" name="Footnote_182_182"/><a href="#FNanchor_182_182"><span class="label">[182]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the false friars.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_183_183" name="Footnote_183_183"/><a href="#FNanchor_183_183"><span class="label">[183]</span></a> Lit. more of iron (<i><span lang="it">più di ferro</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_184_184" name="Footnote_184_184"/><a href="#FNanchor_184_184"><span class="label">[184]</span></a> Sic (<i><span lang="it">per lo modo</span></i>); but <i><span lang="la">quære</span></i> not rather "in the sense."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_185_185" name="Footnote_185_185"/><a href="#FNanchor_185_185"><span class="label">[185]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> if they must enter upon this way of life, to wit, that of the friar.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_186_186" name="Footnote_186_186"/><a href="#FNanchor_186_186"><span class="label">[186]</span></a> The reference is apparently to the opening verse of the Acts of the Apostles, where Luke says, "The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began to do and to teach." It need hardly be remarked that the passage in question does not bear the interpretation Boccaccio would put upon it.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_187_187" name="Footnote_187_187"/><a href="#FNanchor_187_187"><span class="label">[187]</span></a> <i>Sic</i>; but the past tense "loved" is probably intended, as the pretended pilgrim had not yet discovered Tedaldo to be alive.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_188_188" name="Footnote_188_188"/><a href="#FNanchor_188_188"><span class="label">[188]</span></a> Lit. barkers (<i><span lang="it">abbajatori</span></i>), <i>i.e.</i> slanderers.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_189_189" name="Footnote_189_189"/><a href="#FNanchor_189_189"><span class="label">[189]</span></a> Lit. despite, rancour (<i><span lang="it">rugginuzza</span></i>), but the phrase appears to refer to the suspicions excited by the whispers that had been current, as above mentioned, of the connection between Ermellina and Tedaldo.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_190_190" name="Footnote_190_190"/><a href="#FNanchor_190_190"><span class="label">[190]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> foot-soldiers.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_191_191" name="Footnote_191_191"/><a href="#FNanchor_191_191"><span class="label">[191]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> of his identity.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_192_192" name="Footnote_192_192"/><a href="#FNanchor_192_192"><span class="label">[192]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the abbot who played the trick upon Ferondo. See post.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_193_193" name="Footnote_193_193"/><a href="#FNanchor_193_193"><span class="label">[193]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> I will cure your husband of his jealousy.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_194_194" name="Footnote_194_194"/><a href="#FNanchor_194_194"><span class="label">[194]</span></a> The well-known chief of the Assassins (properly <i><span lang="ar">Heshashin</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> hashish or hemp eaters). The powder in question is apparently a preparation of hashish or hemp. Boccaccio seems to have taken his idea of the Old Man of the Mountain from Marco Polo, whose travels, published in the early part of the fourteenth century, give a most romantic account of that chieftain and his followers.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_195_195" name="Footnote_195_195"/><a href="#FNanchor_195_195"><span class="label">[195]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> in the sublunary world.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_196_196" name="Footnote_196_196"/><a href="#FNanchor_196_196"><span class="label">[196]</span></a> <i>Sic</i> (<i><span lang="it">casciata</span></i>); meaning that he loves her as well as he loves cheese, for which it is well known that the lower-class Italian has a romantic passion. According to Alexandre Dumas, the Italian loves cheese so well that he has succeeded in introducing it into everything he eats or drinks, with the one exception of coffee.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_197_197" name="Footnote_197_197"/><a href="#FNanchor_197_197"><span class="label">[197]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the Angel Gabriel.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_198_198" name="Footnote_198_198"/><a href="#FNanchor_198_198"><span class="label">[198]</span></a> The plural of a surname is, in strictness, always used by the Italians in speaking of a man by his full name, <i><span lang="it">dei</span></i> being understood between the Christian and surname, as <i><span lang="it">Benedetto</span></i> (<i><span lang="it">dei</span></i>) <i><span lang="it">Ferondi</span></i>, Benedict of the Ferondos or Ferondo family, whilst, when he is denominated by the surname alone, it is used in the singular, <i><span lang="it">il</span></i> (the) being understood, <i>e.g.</i> <span lang="it">(Il) Boccaccio, (Il) Ferondo</span>, <i>i.e.</i> the particular Boccaccio or Ferondo in question for the nonce.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_199_199" name="Footnote_199_199"/><a href="#FNanchor_199_199"><span class="label">[199]</span></a> Lit. and so I hope (<i><span lang="it">spero</span></i>), a curious instance of the ancient Dantesque use of the word <i><span lang="it">spero</span></i>, I hope, in its contrary sense of fear.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_200_200" name="Footnote_200_200"/><a href="#FNanchor_200_200"><span class="label">[200]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Fornito</span></i>, a notable example of what the illustrious Lewis Carroll Dodgson, Waywode of Wonderland, calls a "portmanteau-word," a species that abounds in mediæval Italian, for the confusion of translators.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_201_201" name="Footnote_201_201"/><a href="#FNanchor_201_201"><span class="label">[201]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> getting good pay and allowances (<i><span lang="it">avendo buona provisione</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_202_202" name="Footnote_202_202"/><a href="#FNanchor_202_202"><span class="label">[202]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Guadagnare l'anima</span></i>, lit. gain the soul (syn. pith, kernel, substance). This passage is ambiguous and should perhaps be rendered "catch the knack or trick" or "acquire the wish."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_203_203" name="Footnote_203_203"/><a href="#FNanchor_203_203"><span class="label">[203]</span></a> The translators regret that the disuse into which magic has fallen, makes it impossible to render the technicalities of that mysterious art into tolerable English; they have therefore found it necessary to insert several passages in the original Italian.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_204_204" name="Footnote_204_204"/><a href="#FNanchor_204_204"><span class="label">[204]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the government (<i><span lang="it">corte</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_205_205" name="Footnote_205_205"/><a href="#FNanchor_205_205"><span class="label">[205]</span></a> Lit. that scythes were no less plenty that he had arrows (<i><span lang="it">che falci si trovavano non meno che egli avesse strali</span></i>), a proverbial expression the exact bearing of which I do not know, but whose evident sense I have rendered in the equivalent English idiom.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_206_206" name="Footnote_206_206"/><a href="#FNanchor_206_206"><span class="label">[206]</span></a> Syn. what he said (<i><span lang="it">che si dire</span></i>). See ante, p. <a href="#Page_11">11</a>, note.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_207_207" name="Footnote_207_207"/><a href="#FNanchor_207_207"><span class="label">[207]</span></a> Apparently the well-known fabliau of the Dame de Vergy, upon which Marguerite d'Angoulême founded the seventieth story of the Heptameron.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_208_208" name="Footnote_208_208"/><a href="#FNanchor_208_208"><span class="label">[208]</span></a> Lit. made (<i><span lang="it">Di me il feci digno</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_209_209" name="Footnote_209_209"/><a href="#FNanchor_209_209"><span class="label">[209]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> false suspicion (<i><span lang="it">falso pensiero</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_210_210" name="Footnote_210_210"/><a href="#FNanchor_210_210"><span class="label">[210]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to heaven (<i><span lang="it">e costa su m'impetra la tornata</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_211_211" name="Footnote_211_211"/><a href="#FNanchor_211_211"><span class="label">[211]</span></a> The pertinence of this allusion, which probably refers to some current Milanese proverbial saying, the word <i><span lang="it">tosa</span></i>, here used by Boccaccio for "wench," belonging to the Lombard dialect, is not very clear. The expression "Milan-fashion" (<i><span lang="it">alla melanese</span></i>) may be supposed to refer to the proverbial materialism of the people of Lombardy.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_212_212" name="Footnote_212_212"/><a href="#FNanchor_212_212"><span class="label">[212]</span></a> Sic (<i><span lang="it">senza invidia</span></i>); but the meaning is that misery alone is without <i><span lang="fr">enviers</span></i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_213_213" name="Footnote_213_213"/><a href="#FNanchor_213_213"><span class="label">[213]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> blasts of calumny.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_214_214" name="Footnote_214_214"/><a href="#FNanchor_214_214"><span class="label">[214]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> having not yet accomplished.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_215_215" name="Footnote_215_215"/><a href="#FNanchor_215_215"><span class="label">[215]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> my censors.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_216_216" name="Footnote_216_216"/><a href="#FNanchor_216_216"><span class="label">[216]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> in alms.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_217_217" name="Footnote_217_217"/><a href="#FNanchor_217_217"><span class="label">[217]</span></a> "I know both how to be abased and I know how to abound; everywhere and in all things I am instructed both to be full and to be hungry, both to abound and suffer need."—<i>Philippians</i> iv. 12.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_218_218" name="Footnote_218_218"/><a href="#FNanchor_218_218"><span class="label">[218]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> benumbed (<i><span lang="it">assiderati</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_219_219" name="Footnote_219_219"/><a href="#FNanchor_219_219"><span class="label">[219]</span></a> Or airshaft (<i><span lang="it">spiraglio</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_220_220" name="Footnote_220_220"/><a href="#FNanchor_220_220"><span class="label">[220]</span></a> Lit. introduced him to me (<i><span lang="it">a me lo 'ntrodussi</span></i>); but Boccaccio here uses the word <i><span lang="it">introdurre</span></i> in its rarer literal sense to lead, to draw, to bring in.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_221_221" name="Footnote_221_221"/><a href="#FNanchor_221_221"><span class="label">[221]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> thou being the means of bringing about the conjunction (<i><span lang="it">adoperandol tu</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_222_222" name="Footnote_222_222"/><a href="#FNanchor_222_222"><span class="label">[222]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Guiscardo's soul.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_223_223" name="Footnote_223_223"/><a href="#FNanchor_223_223"><span class="label">[223]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> in the heart.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_224_224" name="Footnote_224_224"/><a href="#FNanchor_224_224"><span class="label">[224]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> was more inclined to consider the wishes of the ladies her companions, which she divined by sympathy, than those of Filostrato, as shown by his words (<i><span lang="it">più per la sua affezione cognobbe l'animo delle campagne che quello del re per le sue parole</span></i>). It is difficult, however, in this instance as in many others, to discover with certainty Boccaccio's exact meaning, owing to his affectation of Ciceronian concision and delight in obscure elliptical forms of construction; whilst his use of words in a remote or unfamiliar sense and the impossibility of deciding, in certain cases, the person of the pronouns and adjectives employed tend still farther to darken counsel. <i>E.g.</i>, if we render <i><span lang="it">affezione</span></i> sentiment, <i><span lang="it">cognobbe</span></i> (as <i><span lang="it">riconobbe</span></i>) acknowledged, recognized, and read <i><span lang="it">le sue parole</span></i> as meaning <i>her</i> (instead of <i>his</i>) words, the whole sense of the passage is changed, and we must read it "more by her sentiment (<i>i.e.</i> by the tendency and spirit of her story) recognized the inclination of her companions than that of the king by her [actual] words." I have commented thus at large on this passage, in order to give my readers some idea of the difficulties which at every page beset the translator of the Decameron and which make Boccaccio perhaps the most troublesome of all authors to render into representative English.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_225_225" name="Footnote_225_225"/><a href="#FNanchor_225_225"><span class="label">[225]</span></a> Lit. of those who <i>was</i> held of the greatest casuists (<i><span lang="it">di quelli che de' maggior cassesi era tenuto</span></i>). This is another very obscure passage. The meaning of the word <i><span lang="it">cassesi</span></i> is unknown and we can only guess it to be a dialectic (probably Venetian) corruption of the word <i><span lang="it">casisti</span></i> (casuists). The Giunta edition separates the word thus, <i><span lang="it">casse si</span></i>, making <i><span lang="it">si</span></i> a mere corroborative prefix to <i><span lang="it">era</span></i>, but I do not see how the alteration helps us, the word <i><span lang="it">casse</span></i> (chests, boxes) being apparently meaningless in this connection.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_226_226" name="Footnote_226_226"/><a href="#FNanchor_226_226"><span class="label">[226]</span></a> Venetian contraction of <i><span lang="it">Casa</span></i>, house. <span lang="it">Da Ca Quirino</span>, of the Quirino house or family.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_227_227" name="Footnote_227_227"/><a href="#FNanchor_227_227"><span class="label">[227]</span></a> <i>cf.</i> Artemus Ward's "Natives of the Universe and other parts."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_228_228" name="Footnote_228_228"/><a href="#FNanchor_228_228"><span class="label">[228]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Mo vedi vu</span></i>, Venetian for <i><span lang="it">Or vedi tu</span></i>, now dost thou see? I have rendered it by the equivalent old English form.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_229_229" name="Footnote_229_229"/><a href="#FNanchor_229_229"><span class="label">[229]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> not of the trap laid for him by the lady's brothers-in-law, but of her indiscretion in discovering the secret.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_230_230" name="Footnote_230_230"/><a href="#FNanchor_230_230"><span class="label">[230]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Che xe quel</span>?</i> Venetian for <i><span lang="it">che c'e quella cosa</span></i>, What is this thing?</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_231_231" name="Footnote_231_231"/><a href="#FNanchor_231_231"><span class="label">[231]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> <i><span lang="fr">semble</span></i> "an you would wish them nought but an ill end."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_232_232" name="Footnote_232_232"/><a href="#FNanchor_232_232"><span class="label">[232]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to anger.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_233_233" name="Footnote_233_233"/><a href="#FNanchor_233_233"><span class="label">[233]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to the proposal I have to make.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_234_234" name="Footnote_234_234"/><a href="#FNanchor_234_234"><span class="label">[234]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the possession of their mistresses.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_235_235" name="Footnote_235_235"/><a href="#FNanchor_235_235"><span class="label">[235]</span></a> Sic (<i><span lang="it">di che veleno fosse morto</span></i>), but this is probably a copyist's error for <i><span lang="it">che di veleno fosse morto</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> that he had died of poison.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_236_236" name="Footnote_236_236"/><a href="#FNanchor_236_236"><span class="label">[236]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> that night.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_237_237" name="Footnote_237_237"/><a href="#FNanchor_237_237"><span class="label">[237]</span></a> Or, in modern parlance, "laying certain plans."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_238_238" name="Footnote_238_238"/><a href="#FNanchor_238_238"><span class="label">[238]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> for lack of wind.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_239_239" name="Footnote_239_239"/><a href="#FNanchor_239_239"><span class="label">[239]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> of each other.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_240_240" name="Footnote_240_240"/><a href="#FNanchor_240_240"><span class="label">[240]</span></a> This is the proper name of the heroine of the story immortalized by Keats as "Isabella or the Pot of Basil," and is one of the many forms of the and name <i>Elisabetta</i> (Elizabeth), <i>Isabetta</i> and <i>Isabella</i> being others. Some texts of the Decameron call the heroine <i>Isabetta</i>, but in the heading only, all with which I am acquainted agreeing in the use of the form <i>Lisabetta</i> in the body of the story.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_241_241" name="Footnote_241_241"/><a href="#FNanchor_241_241"><span class="label">[241]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to the place shown her in the dream.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_242_242" name="Footnote_242_242"/><a href="#FNanchor_242_242"><span class="label">[242]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> in their service.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_243_243" name="Footnote_243_243"/><a href="#FNanchor_243_243"><span class="label">[243]</span></a> Lit. unhung (<i><span lang="it">spiccò</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_244_244" name="Footnote_244_244"/><a href="#FNanchor_244_244"><span class="label">[244]</span></a> The following is a translation of the whole of the song in question, as printed, from a MS. in the Medicean Library, in Fanfani's edition of the Decameron.</p>
				<p>Alack! ah, who can the ill Christian be,<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">That stole my pot away,</span><br/>
				My pot of basil of Salern, from me?<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">'Twas thriv'n with many a spray</span><br/>
				And I with mine own hand did plant the tree,<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Even on the festal<a id="FNanchor_A_245" name="FNanchor_A_245"/><a class="fnanchor" href="#Footnote_A_245">[A]</a> day.</span><br/>
				'Tis felony to waste another's ware.<br/></p>
				<p>'Tis felony to waste another's ware;<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Yea, and right grievous sin.</span><br/>
				And I, poor lass, that sowed myself whilere<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">A pot with flowers therein,</span><br/>
				Slept in its shade, so great it was and fair;<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">But folk, that envious bin,</span><br/>
				Stole it away even from my very door.<br/></p>
				<p>'Twas stolen away even from my very door.<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Full heavy was my cheer,</span><br/>
				(Ah, luckless maid, would I had died tofore!)<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Who brought<a id="FNanchor_B_246" name="FNanchor_B_246"/><a class="fnanchor" href="#Footnote_B_246">[B]</a> it passing dear,</span><br/>
				Yet kept ill ward thereon one day of fear.<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">For him I loved so sore,</span><br/>
				I planted it with marjoram about.<br/></p>
				<p>I planted it with marjoram about,<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">When May was blithe and new;</span><br/>
				Yea, thrice I watered it, week in, week out,<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">And watched how well it grew:</span><br/>
				But now, for sure, away from me 'tis ta'en.<br/></p>
				<p>Ay, now, for sure, away from me 'tis ta'en;<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I may 't no longer hide.</span><br/>
				Had I but known (alas, regret is vain!)<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">That which should me betide,</span><br/>
				Before my door on guard I would have lain<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">To sleep, my flowers beside.</span><br/>
				Yet might the Great God ease me at His will.<br/></p>
				<p>Yea, God Most High might ease me, at His will,<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">If but it liked Him well,</span><br/>
				Of him who wrought me such unright and ill;<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">He into pangs of hell</span><br/>
				Cast me who stole my basil-pot, that still<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">Was full of such sweet smell,</span><br/>
				Its savour did all dole from me away.<br/></p>
				<p>All dole its savour did from me away;<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">It was so redolent,</span><br/>
				When, with the risen sun, at early day<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">To water it I went,</span><br/>
				The folk would marvel all at it and say,<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">"Whence comes the sweetest scent?"</span><br/>
				And I for love of it shall surely die.<br/></p>
				<p>Yea, I for love of it shall surely die,<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">For love and grief and pain.</span><br/>
				If one would tell me where it is, I'd buy<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">It willingly again.</span><br/>
				Fivescore gold crowns, that in my pouch have I,<br/>
				<span style="margin-left: 1em;">I'd proffer him full fain,</span><br/>
				And eke a kiss, if so it liked the swain.<br/></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_A_245" name="Footnote_A_245"/><a href="#FNanchor_A_245"><span class="label">[A]</span></a> <span lang="la">Quære</span>—natal?—perhaps meaning her birthday (<i><span lang="it">lo giorno della festa</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_B_246" name="Footnote_B_246"/><a href="#FNanchor_B_246"><span class="label">[B]</span></a> Or "purchased" in the old sense of obtained, acquired (<i><span lang="it">accattai</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_245_247" name="Footnote_245_247"/><a href="#FNanchor_245_247"><span class="label">[245]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> these two classes of folk.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_246_248" name="Footnote_246_248"/><a href="#FNanchor_246_248"><span class="label">[246]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to the encouragement of good and virtuous actions and purposes.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_247_249" name="Footnote_247_249"/><a href="#FNanchor_247_249"><span class="label">[247]</span></a> Or "lap" (<i><span lang="it">seno</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_248_250" name="Footnote_248_250"/><a href="#FNanchor_248_250"><span class="label">[248]</span></a> Lit. what meaneth this? (<i><span lang="it">che vuol dire questo</span>?</i>)</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_249_251" name="Footnote_249_251"/><a href="#FNanchor_249_251"><span class="label">[249]</span></a> Lit. complaining, making complaint (<i><span lang="it">dolendosi</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_250_252" name="Footnote_250_252"/><a href="#FNanchor_250_252"><span class="label">[250]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to attend the ecclesiastical function called a Pardon, with which word, used in this sense, Meyerbeer's opera of Dinorah (properly <span lang="fr">Le Pardon de Ploërmel</span>) has familiarized opera-goers. A Pardon is a sort of minor jubilee of the Roman Catholic Church, held in honour of some local saint, at which certain indulgences and remissions of sins (hence the name) are granted to the faithful attending the services of the occasion.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_251_253" name="Footnote_251_253"/><a href="#FNanchor_251_253"><span class="label">[251]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Bandy-legs.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_252_254" name="Footnote_252_254"/><a href="#FNanchor_252_254"><span class="label">[252]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Ristretti in sè gli spiriti</span>.</i> An obscure passage; perhaps "holding his breath" is meant; but in this case we should read "<i><span lang="it">lo spirito</span></i>" instead of "<i><span lang="it">gli spiriti</span></i>."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_253_255" name="Footnote_253_255"/><a href="#FNanchor_253_255"><span class="label">[253]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> what course she should take in the matter, <i><span lang="it">consiglio</span></i> used as before (see notes, pp. <a href="#Page_2">2</a> and <a href="#Page_150">150</a>) in this special sense.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_254_256" name="Footnote_254_256"/><a href="#FNanchor_254_256"><span class="label">[254]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> her heart.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_255_257" name="Footnote_255_257"/><a href="#FNanchor_255_257"><span class="label">[255]</span></a> Or surfeited (<i><span lang="it">svogliato</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_256_258" name="Footnote_256_258"/><a href="#FNanchor_256_258"><span class="label">[256]</span></a> This is the well-known story of the Troubadour Guillem de Cabestanh or Cabestaing, whose name Boccaccio alters to Guardastagno or Guardestaing.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_257_259" name="Footnote_257_259"/><a href="#FNanchor_257_259"><span class="label">[257]</span></a> A proverbial way of saying that he was fast asleep.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_258_260" name="Footnote_258_260"/><a href="#FNanchor_258_260"><span class="label">[258]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> about half-past seven a.m.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_259_261" name="Footnote_259_261"/><a href="#FNanchor_259_261"><span class="label">[259]</span></a> Or "having risen from the grinding" (<i><span lang="it">levatasi dal macinio</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_260_262" name="Footnote_260_262"/><a href="#FNanchor_260_262"><span class="label">[260]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the theme proposed by her.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_261_263" name="Footnote_261_263"/><a href="#FNanchor_261_263"><span class="label">[261]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> on my heart.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_262_264" name="Footnote_262_264"/><a href="#FNanchor_262_264"><span class="label">[262]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> death.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_263_265" name="Footnote_263_265"/><a href="#FNanchor_263_265"><span class="label">[263]</span></a> Or farm (<i>villa</i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_264_266" name="Footnote_264_266"/><a href="#FNanchor_264_266"><span class="label">[264]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> of music, vocal and instrumental.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_265_267" name="Footnote_265_267"/><a href="#FNanchor_265_267"><span class="label">[265]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Per fortuna</span>.</i> This may also be rendered "by tempest," <i><span lang="it">fortuna</span></i> being a name for a squall or hurricane, which Boccaccio uses elsewhere in the same sense.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_266_268" name="Footnote_266_268"/><a href="#FNanchor_266_268"><span class="label">[266]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> thy spirit.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_267_269" name="Footnote_267_269"/><a href="#FNanchor_267_269"><span class="label">[267]</span></a> Syn. inclinations (<i><span lang="it">affezioni</span></i>). This is a somewhat obscure passage, owing to the vagueness of the word <i><span lang="it">affezioni</span></i> (syn. <i><span lang="it">affetti</span></i>) in this position, and may be rendered, with about equal probability, in more than one way.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_268_270" name="Footnote_268_270"/><a href="#FNanchor_268_270"><span class="label">[268]</span></a> Or "eminent" (<i><span lang="it">valoroso</span></i>), <i>i.e.</i> in modern parlance, "a man of merit and talent."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_269_271" name="Footnote_269_271"/><a href="#FNanchor_269_271"><span class="label">[269]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Valoroso nel suo mestiere</span>.</i> It does not appear that Martuccio was a craftsman and it is possible, therefore, that Boccaccio intended the word <i><span lang="it">mestiere</span></i> to be taken in the sense (to me unknown) of "condition" or "estate," in which case the passage would read, "a man of worth for (<i>i.e.</i> as far as comported with) his [mean] estate"; and this seems a probable reading.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_270_272" name="Footnote_270_272"/><a href="#FNanchor_270_272"><span class="label">[270]</span></a> Lit. necessity (<i><span lang="it">necessità</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_271_273" name="Footnote_271_273"/><a href="#FNanchor_271_273"><span class="label">[271]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to use a new (or strange) fashion of exposing herself to an inevitable death (<i><span lang="it">nuova necessità dare alla sua morte</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_272_274" name="Footnote_272_274"/><a href="#FNanchor_272_274"><span class="label">[272]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> knew not whether she was ashore or afloat, so absorbed was she in her despair.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_273_275" name="Footnote_273_275"/><a href="#FNanchor_273_275"><span class="label">[273]</span></a> Or "augured well from the hearing of the name." <i><span lang="it">Carapresa</span></i> signifies "a dear or precious prize, gain or capture."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_274_276" name="Footnote_274_276"/><a href="#FNanchor_274_276"><span class="label">[274]</span></a> This name is apparently a distortion of the Arabic <i><span lang="ar">Amir Abdullah</span></i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_275_277" name="Footnote_275_277"/><a href="#FNanchor_275_277"><span class="label">[275]</span></a> Clement V. early in the fourteenth century removed the Papal See to Avignon, where it continued to be during the reigns of the five succeeding Popes, Rome being in the meantime abandoned by the Papal Court, till Gregory XI, in the year 1376 again took up his residence at the latter city. It is apparently to this circumstance that Boccaccio alludes in the text.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_276_278" name="Footnote_276_278"/><a href="#FNanchor_276_278"><span class="label">[276]</span></a> Lit. stand (<i><span lang="it">stare</span></i>), <i>i.e.</i> abide undone.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_277_279" name="Footnote_277_279"/><a href="#FNanchor_277_279"><span class="label">[277]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> a native of Faenza (<i><span lang="it">Faentina</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_278_280" name="Footnote_278_280"/><a href="#FNanchor_278_280"><span class="label">[278]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">A questo fatto</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> at the storm of Faenza.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_279_281" name="Footnote_279_281"/><a href="#FNanchor_279_281"><span class="label">[279]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the owner of the plundered house.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_280_282" name="Footnote_280_282"/><a href="#FNanchor_280_282"><span class="label">[280]</span></a> Iron., meaning "with how little discretion."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_281_283" name="Footnote_281_283"/><a href="#FNanchor_281_283"><span class="label">[281]</span></a> Gianni (Giovanni) di Procida was a Sicilian noble, to whose efforts in stirring up the island to revolt against Charles of Anjou was mainly due the popular rising known as the Sicilian Vespers (<span class="smcap">a.d.</span> 1283) which expelled the French usurper from Sicily and transferred the crown to the house of Arragon. The Frederick (<span class="smcap">a.d.</span> 1296-1337) named in the text was the fourth prince of the latter dynasty.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_282_284" name="Footnote_282_284"/><a href="#FNanchor_282_284"><span class="label">[282]</span></a> William II. (<span class="smcap">a.d.</span> 1166-1189), the last (legitimate) king of the Norman dynasty in Sicily, called the Good, to distinguish him from his father, William the Bad.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_283_285" name="Footnote_283_285"/><a href="#FNanchor_283_285"><span class="label">[283]</span></a> Apparently a pleasure-garden, without a house attached in which they might have taken shelter from the rain.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_284_286" name="Footnote_284_286"/><a href="#FNanchor_284_286"><span class="label">[284]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> of her sin.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_285_287" name="Footnote_285_287"/><a href="#FNanchor_285_287"><span class="label">[285]</span></a> Syn. your charms (<i><span lang="it">la vostra vaghezza</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_286_288" name="Footnote_286_288"/><a href="#FNanchor_286_288"><span class="label">[286]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> she was grown so repulsively ugly in her old age, that no one cared to do her even so trifling a service as giving her a spark in tinder to light her fire withal.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_287_289" name="Footnote_287_289"/><a href="#FNanchor_287_289"><span class="label">[287]</span></a> Or chokebits (<i><span lang="it">stranguglioni</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_288_290" name="Footnote_288_290"/><a href="#FNanchor_288_290"><span class="label">[288]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> that they may serve to purchase remission from purgatory for the souls of her dead relatives, instead of the burning of candles and tapers, which is held by the Roman Catholic Church to have that effect.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_289_291" name="Footnote_289_291"/><a href="#FNanchor_289_291"><span class="label">[289]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> a hypocritical sham devotee, covering a lewd life with an appearance of sanctity.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_290_292" name="Footnote_290_292"/><a href="#FNanchor_290_292"><span class="label">[290]</span></a> Lit. a due or deserved bite (<i><span lang="it">debito morso</span></i>). I mention this to show the connection with teeth.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_291_293" name="Footnote_291_293"/><a href="#FNanchor_291_293"><span class="label">[291]</span></a> An ellipsis of a kind common in Boccaccio and indeed in all the old Italian writers, meaning "it may be useful to enlarge upon the subject in question."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_292_294" name="Footnote_292_294"/><a href="#FNanchor_292_294"><span class="label">[292]</span></a> The songs proposed by Dioneo are all apparently of a light, if not a wanton, character and "not fit to be sung before ladies."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_293_295" name="Footnote_293_295"/><a href="#FNanchor_293_295"><span class="label">[293]</span></a> This singularly naïve give-and-take fashion of asking a favour of a God recalls the old Scotch epitaph cited by Mr. George Macdonald:</p>
				<p>Here lie I Martin Elginbrodde:<br/>
				Hae mercy o' my soul, Lord God;<br/>
				As I wad do, were I Lord God<br/>
				And ye were Martin Elginbrodde.<br/></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_294_296" name="Footnote_294_296"/><a href="#FNanchor_294_296"><span class="label">[294]</span></a> Lit. for their returning to consistory (<i><span lang="it">del dovere a concistoro tornare</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_295_297" name="Footnote_295_297"/><a href="#FNanchor_295_297"><span class="label">[295]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Messer Mazza</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> <span lang="la">veretrum</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_296_298" name="Footnote_296_298"/><a href="#FNanchor_296_298"><span class="label">[296]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Monte Nero</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> <span lang="la">vas muliebre</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_297_299" name="Footnote_297_299"/><a href="#FNanchor_297_299"><span class="label">[297]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> who are yet a child, in modern parlance, "Thou whose lips are yet wet with thy mother's milk."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_298_300" name="Footnote_298_300"/><a href="#FNanchor_298_300"><span class="label">[298]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> women's.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_299_301" name="Footnote_299_301"/><a href="#FNanchor_299_301"><span class="label">[299]</span></a> See ante, p. <a href="#Page_43">43</a>, Introduction to the last story of the First Day.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_300_302" name="Footnote_300_302"/><a href="#FNanchor_300_302"><span class="label">[300]</span></a> Lit. Family wine (<i><span lang="it">vin da famiglia</span></i>), <i>i.e.</i> no wine for servants' or general drinking, but a choice vintage, to be reserved for special occasions.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_301_303" name="Footnote_301_303"/><a href="#FNanchor_301_303"><span class="label">[301]</span></a> A silver coin of about the size and value of our silver penny, which, when gilded, would pass muster well enough for a gold florin, unless closely examined.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_302_304" name="Footnote_302_304"/><a href="#FNanchor_302_304"><span class="label">[302]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Il palio</span></i>, a race anciently run at Florence on St. John's Day, as that of the Barberi at Rome during the Carnival.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_303_305" name="Footnote_303_305"/><a href="#FNanchor_303_305"><span class="label">[303]</span></a> Lit. knowing not whence himself came.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_304_306" name="Footnote_304_306"/><a href="#FNanchor_304_306"><span class="label">[304]</span></a> Or, as we should say, "in his own coin."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_305_307" name="Footnote_305_307"/><a href="#FNanchor_305_307"><span class="label">[305]</span></a> A commentator notes that the adjunction to the world of the Maremma (cf. Elijer Goff, "The Irish Question has for some centuries been enjoyed by <i>the universe and other parts</i>") produces a risible effect and gives the reader to understand that Scalza broaches the question only by way of a joke. The same may be said of the jesting inversion of the word philosophers (phisopholers, <span lang="it">Fisofoli</span>) in the next line.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_306_308" name="Footnote_306_308"/><a href="#FNanchor_306_308"><span class="label">[306]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Baronci</span></i>, the Florentine name for what we should call professional beggars, "mumpers, chanters and Abrahammen," called <i><span lang="it">Bari</span></i> and <i><span lang="it">Barocci</span></i> in other parts of Italy. This story has been a prodigious stumbling-block to former translators, not one of whom appears to have had the slightest idea of Boccaccio's meaning.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_307_309" name="Footnote_307_309"/><a href="#FNanchor_307_309"><span class="label">[307]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> of the comical fashion of the Cadgers.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_308_310" name="Footnote_308_310"/><a href="#FNanchor_308_310"><span class="label">[308]</span></a> An abbreviation of Francesca.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_309_311" name="Footnote_309_311"/><a href="#FNanchor_309_311"><span class="label">[309]</span></a> "Or her."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_310_312" name="Footnote_310_312"/><a href="#FNanchor_310_312"><span class="label">[310]</span></a> Lit. to avoid or elude a scorn (<i><span lang="it">fuggire uno scorno</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_311_313" name="Footnote_311_313"/><a href="#FNanchor_311_313"><span class="label">[311]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Cipolla</span></i> means onion.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_312_314" name="Footnote_312_314"/><a href="#FNanchor_312_314"><span class="label">[312]</span></a> The term "well-wisher" (<i><span lang="it">benivogliente</span></i>), when understood in relation to a woman, is generally equivalent (at least with the older Italian writers) to "lover." See ante, passim.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_313_315" name="Footnote_313_315"/><a href="#FNanchor_313_315"><span class="label">[313]</span></a> Diminutive of contempt of Arrigo, contracted from Arriguccio, <i>i.e.</i> mean little Arrigo.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_314_316" name="Footnote_314_316"/><a href="#FNanchor_314_316"><span class="label">[314]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Whale.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_315_317" name="Footnote_315_317"/><a href="#FNanchor_315_317"><span class="label">[315]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Dirt.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_316_318" name="Footnote_316_318"/><a href="#FNanchor_316_318"><span class="label">[316]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Hog.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_317_319" name="Footnote_317_319"/><a href="#FNanchor_317_319"><span class="label">[317]</span></a> A painter of Boccaccio's time, of whom little or nothing seems to be known.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_318_320" name="Footnote_318_320"/><a href="#FNanchor_318_320"><span class="label">[318]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Perpendo lo coreggia</span>.</i> The exact meaning of this passage is not clear. The commentators make sundry random shots at it, but, as usual, only succeed in making confusion worse confounded. It may perhaps be rendered, "till his wind failed him."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_319_321" name="Footnote_319_321"/><a href="#FNanchor_319_321"><span class="label">[319]</span></a> Said by the commentators to have been an abbey, where they made cheese-soup for all comers twice a week; hence "the caldron of Altopascio" became a proverb; but <i><span lang="la">quære</span></i> is not the name Altopascio (high feeding) a fancy one?</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_320_322" name="Footnote_320_322"/><a href="#FNanchor_320_322"><span class="label">[320]</span></a> It does not appear to which member of this great house Boccaccio here alludes, but the Châtillons were always rich and magnificent gentlemen, from Gaucher de Châtillon, who followed Philip Augustus to the third crusade, to the great Admiral de Coligny.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_321_323" name="Footnote_321_323"/><a href="#FNanchor_321_323"><span class="label">[321]</span></a> Sic (<i><span lang="it">star con altrui</span></i>); but "being in the service of or dependent upon others" seems to be the probable meaning.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_322_324" name="Footnote_322_324"/><a href="#FNanchor_322_324"><span class="label">[322]</span></a> Apparently the Neapolitan town of that name.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_323_325" name="Footnote_323_325"/><a href="#FNanchor_323_325"><span class="label">[323]</span></a> The name of a famous tavern in Florence (<i><span lang="it">Florio</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_324_326" name="Footnote_324_326"/><a href="#FNanchor_324_326"><span class="label">[324]</span></a> <i><span lang="la">Quære</span></i> a place in Florence? One of the commentators, with characteristic carelessness, states that the places mentioned in the preachment of Fra Cipolla (an amusing specimen of the patter-sermon of the mendicant friar of the middle ages, that ecclesiastical Cheap Jack of his day) are all names of streets or places of Florence, a statement which, it is evident to the most cursory reader, is altogether inaccurate.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_325_327" name="Footnote_325_327"/><a href="#FNanchor_325_327"><span class="label">[325]</span></a> Apparently the island of that name near Venice.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_326_328" name="Footnote_326_328"/><a href="#FNanchor_326_328"><span class="label">[326]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Nonsense-land.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_327_329" name="Footnote_327_329"/><a href="#FNanchor_327_329"><span class="label">[327]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Land of Tricks or Cozenage.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_328_330" name="Footnote_328_330"/><a href="#FNanchor_328_330"><span class="label">[328]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Falsehood, Lie-land.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_329_331" name="Footnote_329_331"/><a href="#FNanchor_329_331"><span class="label">[329]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> paying their way with fine words, instead of coin.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_330_332" name="Footnote_330_332"/><a href="#FNanchor_330_332"><span class="label">[330]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> making sausages of them.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_331_333" name="Footnote_331_333"/><a href="#FNanchor_331_333"><span class="label">[331]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Bachi</span></i>, drones or maggots. <i><span lang="it">Pastinaca</span></i> means "parsnip" and is a meaningless addition of Fra Cipolla's fashion.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_332_334" name="Footnote_332_334"/><a href="#FNanchor_332_334"><span class="label">[332]</span></a> A play of words upon the primary meaning (winged things) of the word <i><span lang="it">pennate</span></i>, hedge-bills.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_333_335" name="Footnote_333_335"/><a href="#FNanchor_333_335"><span class="label">[333]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> The Word [made] flesh. Get-thee-to-the-windows is only a patter tag.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_334_336" name="Footnote_334_336"/><a href="#FNanchor_334_336"><span class="label">[334]</span></a> Or Slopes or Coasts (<i><span lang="it">piaggie</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_335_337" name="Footnote_335_337"/><a href="#FNanchor_335_337"><span class="label">[335]</span></a> ?</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_336_338" name="Footnote_336_338"/><a href="#FNanchor_336_338"><span class="label">[336]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Industria</span></i> in the old sense of ingenuity, skilful procurement, etc.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_337_339" name="Footnote_337_339"/><a href="#FNanchor_337_339"><span class="label">[337]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the tale-telling.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_338_340" name="Footnote_338_340"/><a href="#FNanchor_338_340"><span class="label">[338]</span></a> Lit. the northern chariot (<i><span lang="it">carro di tramontana</span></i>); <i><span lang="la">quære</span></i> the Great Bear?</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_339_341" name="Footnote_339_341"/><a href="#FNanchor_339_341"><span class="label">[339]</span></a> Alluding to the subject fixed for the next day's discourse, as who should say, "Have you begun already to play tricks upon us men in very deed, ere you tell about them in words?"</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_340_342" name="Footnote_340_342"/><a href="#FNanchor_340_342"><span class="label">[340]</span></a> See p. <a href="#Page_144">144</a>, note 2.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_341_343" name="Footnote_341_343"/><a href="#FNanchor_341_343"><span class="label">[341]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> <span lang="la">pene arrecto</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_342_344" name="Footnote_342_344"/><a href="#FNanchor_342_344"><span class="label">[342]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> a fattened capon well larded.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_343_345" name="Footnote_343_345"/><a href="#FNanchor_343_345"><span class="label">[343]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> eggs.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_344_346" name="Footnote_344_346"/><a href="#FNanchor_344_346"><span class="label">[344]</span></a> So called from the figure of a lily stamped on the coin; cf. our rose-nobles.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_345_347" name="Footnote_345_347"/><a href="#FNanchor_345_347"><span class="label">[345]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the discarded vanities aforesaid.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_346_348" name="Footnote_346_348"/><a href="#FNanchor_346_348"><span class="label">[346]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the other ex votos.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_347_349" name="Footnote_347_349"/><a href="#FNanchor_347_349"><span class="label">[347]</span></a> There is apparently some satirical allusion here, which I cannot undertake to explain.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_348_350" name="Footnote_348_350"/><a href="#FNanchor_348_350"><span class="label">[348]</span></a> Syn. professor of the liberal arts (<i><span lang="it">artista</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_349_351" name="Footnote_349_351"/><a href="#FNanchor_349_351"><span class="label">[349]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> inhabitants of Arezzo.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_350_352" name="Footnote_350_352"/><a href="#FNanchor_350_352"><span class="label">[350]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Riporre</span></i>, possibly a mistake for <i><span lang="it">riportare</span></i>, to fetch back.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_351_353" name="Footnote_351_353"/><a href="#FNanchor_351_353"><span class="label">[351]</span></a> Lit. wished her all his weal.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_352_354" name="Footnote_352_354"/><a href="#FNanchor_352_354"><span class="label">[352]</span></a> Boccaccio writes carelessly "for <i>aught</i>" (<i><span lang="it">altro</span></i>), which makes nonsense of the passage.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_353_355" name="Footnote_353_355"/><a href="#FNanchor_353_355"><span class="label">[353]</span></a> Or, in modern parlance, "twopennny-halfpenny."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_354_356" name="Footnote_354_356"/><a href="#FNanchor_354_356"><span class="label">[354]</span></a> Syn. encourager, helper, auxiliary (<i><span lang="it">confortatore</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_355_357" name="Footnote_355_357"/><a href="#FNanchor_355_357"><span class="label">[355]</span></a> This sudden change from the third to the second person, in speaking of Nicostratus, is a characteristic example of Boccaccio's constant abuse of the figure enallage in his dialogues.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_356_358" name="Footnote_356_358"/><a href="#FNanchor_356_358"><span class="label">[356]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> those eyes.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_357_359" name="Footnote_357_359"/><a href="#FNanchor_357_359"><span class="label">[357]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the Siennese.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_358_360" name="Footnote_358_360"/><a href="#FNanchor_358_360"><span class="label">[358]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> from discovering to his friend his liking for the lady.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_359_361" name="Footnote_359_361"/><a href="#FNanchor_359_361"><span class="label">[359]</span></a> Or, in modern parlance, logic-chopping (<i><span lang="it">sillogizzando</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_360_362" name="Footnote_360_362"/><a href="#FNanchor_360_362"><span class="label">[360]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> with that whereof you bear the name, <i>i.e.</i> laurel (<i><span lang="it">laurea</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_361_363" name="Footnote_361_363"/><a href="#FNanchor_361_363"><span class="label">[361]</span></a> Or "on this subject" (<i><span lang="it">in questo</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_362_364" name="Footnote_362_364"/><a href="#FNanchor_362_364"><span class="label">[362]</span></a> <i><span lang="la">Quære</span></i>, "half-complines," <i>i.e.</i> half-past seven p.m. "Half-vespers" would be half-past four, which seems too early.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_363_365" name="Footnote_363_365"/><a href="#FNanchor_363_365"><span class="label">[363]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Carolando</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> dancing in a round and singing the while, the original meaning of our word "carol."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_364_366" name="Footnote_364_366"/><a href="#FNanchor_364_366"><span class="label">[364]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> half-past seven a.m.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_365_367" name="Footnote_365_367"/><a href="#FNanchor_365_367"><span class="label">[365]</span></a> Where the papal court then was. See p. <a href="#Page_257">257</a>, note.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_366_368" name="Footnote_366_368"/><a href="#FNanchor_366_368"><span class="label">[366]</span></a> Or, as La Fontaine would say, "<span lang="fr">aussi bien faite pour armer un lit</span>."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_367_369" name="Footnote_367_369"/><a href="#FNanchor_367_369"><span class="label">[367]</span></a> Or apron.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_368_370" name="Footnote_368_370"/><a href="#FNanchor_368_370"><span class="label">[368]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Se n'andò col ceteratojo</span></i>; a proverbial expression of similar meaning to our "was whistled down the wind," <i>i.e.</i> was lightly dismissed without provision, like a cast-off hawk.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_369_371" name="Footnote_369_371"/><a href="#FNanchor_369_371"><span class="label">[369]</span></a> A play of words upon the Italian equivalent of the French word Douay (<i><span lang="it">Duagio</span>, i.e. Twoay, <span lang="it">Treagio, Quattragio</span></i>) invented by the roguish priest to impose upon the simple goodwife.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_370_372" name="Footnote_370_372"/><a href="#FNanchor_370_372"><span class="label">[370]</span></a> Or in modern parlance, "making her a connection by marriage of etc.," Boccaccio feigning priests to be members of the Holy Family, by virtue of their office.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_371_373" name="Footnote_371_373"/><a href="#FNanchor_371_373"><span class="label">[371]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Good cheer.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_372_374" name="Footnote_372_374"/><a href="#FNanchor_372_374"><span class="label">[372]</span></a> A play upon the double meaning of <i><span lang="it">a denajo</span></i>, which signifies also "for money."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_373_375" name="Footnote_373_375"/><a href="#FNanchor_373_375"><span class="label">[373]</span></a> A kind of rissole made of eggs, sweet herbs and cheese.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_374_376" name="Footnote_374_376"/><a href="#FNanchor_374_376"><span class="label">[374]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Vernaccia</span></i>, a kind of rich white wine like Malmsey.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_375_377" name="Footnote_375_377"/><a href="#FNanchor_375_377"><span class="label">[375]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> not strait-cut.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_376_378" name="Footnote_376_378"/><a href="#FNanchor_376_378"><span class="label">[376]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Sforzandosi</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> recovering his wind with an effort.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_377_379" name="Footnote_377_379"/><a href="#FNanchor_377_379"><span class="label">[377]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> love him, grant him her favours. See ante, passim.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_378_380" name="Footnote_378_380"/><a href="#FNanchor_378_380"><span class="label">[378]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> in the malaria district.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_379_381" name="Footnote_379_381"/><a href="#FNanchor_379_381"><span class="label">[379]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> great ugly Ciuta.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_380_382" name="Footnote_380_382"/><a href="#FNanchor_380_382"><span class="label">[380]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Quarantanove</span></i>, a proverbial expression for an indefinite number.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_381_383" name="Footnote_381_383"/><a href="#FNanchor_381_383"><span class="label">[381]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> how they might do this.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_382_384" name="Footnote_382_384"/><a href="#FNanchor_382_384"><span class="label">[382]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> in the old sense of "manager" (<i><span lang="it">massajo</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_383_385" name="Footnote_383_385"/><a href="#FNanchor_383_385"><span class="label">[383]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> white wine, see p. <a href="#Page_372">372</a>, note.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_384_386" name="Footnote_384_386"/><a href="#FNanchor_384_386"><span class="label">[384]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> embarked on a bootless quest.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_385_387" name="Footnote_385_387"/><a href="#FNanchor_385_387"><span class="label">[385]</span></a> A proverbial way of saying that he bore malice and was vindictive.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_386_388" name="Footnote_386_388"/><a href="#FNanchor_386_388"><span class="label">[386]</span></a> Lit. out of hand (<i><span lang="it">fuor di mano</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_387_389" name="Footnote_387_389"/><a href="#FNanchor_387_389"><span class="label">[387]</span></a> Boccaccio here misquotes himself. See p. <a href="#Page_389">389</a>, where the lady says to her lover, "Whether seemeth to thee the greater, his wit or the love I bear him?" This is only one of the numberless instances of negligence and inconsistency which occur in the Decameron and which make it evident to the student that it must have passed into the hands of the public without the final revision and correction by the author, that <i><span lang="la">limæ labor</span></i> without which no book is complete and which is especially necessary in the case of such a work as the present, where Boccaccio figures as the virtual creator of Italian prose.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_388_390" name="Footnote_388_390"/><a href="#FNanchor_388_390"><span class="label">[388]</span></a> Lit. face, aspect (<i><span lang="it">viso</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_389_391" name="Footnote_389_391"/><a href="#FNanchor_389_391"><span class="label">[389]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> thy lover's.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_390_392" name="Footnote_390_392"/><a href="#FNanchor_390_392"><span class="label">[390]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">V'è donato</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> young lovers look to receive gifts of their mistresses, whilst those of more mature age bestow them.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_391_393" name="Footnote_391_393"/><a href="#FNanchor_391_393"><span class="label">[391]</span></a> Lit. red as rabies (<i><span lang="it">rabbia</span></i>). Some commentators suppose that Boccaccio meant to write <i>robbia</i>, madder.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_392_394" name="Footnote_392_394"/><a href="#FNanchor_392_394"><span class="label">[392]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> resource (<i><span lang="it">consiglio</span></i>). See ante, passim.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_393_395" name="Footnote_393_395"/><a href="#FNanchor_393_395"><span class="label">[393]</span></a> Boccaccio appears to have forgotten to mention that Rinieri had broken the rounds of the ladder, when he withdrew it (as stated, p. <a href="#Page_394">394</a>), apparently to place an additional obstacle in the way of the lady's escape.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_394_396" name="Footnote_394_396"/><a href="#FNanchor_394_396"><span class="label">[394]</span></a> <i><span lang="la">Quære</span></i>, the street of that name?</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_395_397" name="Footnote_395_397"/><a href="#FNanchor_395_397"><span class="label">[395]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Danza trivigiana</span></i>, lit. Trevisan dance, O.E. the shaking of the sheets.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_396_398" name="Footnote_396_398"/><a href="#FNanchor_396_398"><span class="label">[396]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> with the doctor's hood of miniver.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_397_399" name="Footnote_397_399"/><a href="#FNanchor_397_399"><span class="label">[397]</span></a> The colour of the doctors' robes of that time.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_398_400" name="Footnote_398_400"/><a href="#FNanchor_398_400"><span class="label">[398]</span></a> The commentators note here that on the church door of San Gallo was depicted an especially frightful Lucifer, with many mouths.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_399_401" name="Footnote_399_401"/><a href="#FNanchor_399_401"><span class="label">[399]</span></a> Legnaja is said to be famous for big pumpkins.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_400_402" name="Footnote_400_402"/><a href="#FNanchor_400_402"><span class="label">[400]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> they think of and cherish us alone, holding us as dear as their very eyes.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_401_403" name="Footnote_401_403"/><a href="#FNanchor_401_403"><span class="label">[401]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Fat-hog and Get-thee-to-supper, burlesque perversions of the names Ipocrasso (Hippocrates) and Avicenna.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_402_404" name="Footnote_402_404"/><a href="#FNanchor_402_404"><span class="label">[402]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> love her beyond anything in the world. For former instances of this idiomatic expression, see ante, passim.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_403_405" name="Footnote_403_405"/><a href="#FNanchor_403_405"><span class="label">[403]</span></a> Syn. cauterized (<i><span lang="it">calterita</span></i>), a nonsensical word employed by Bruno for the purpose of mystifying the credulous physician.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_404_406" name="Footnote_404_406"/><a href="#FNanchor_404_406"><span class="label">[404]</span></a> Syn. secretary, confidant (<i><span lang="it">segretaro</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_405_407" name="Footnote_405_407"/><a href="#FNanchor_405_407"><span class="label">[405]</span></a> A play of words upon <i><span lang="it">mela</span></i> (apple) and <i><span lang="it">mellone</span></i> (pumpkin). <i><span lang="it">Mellone</span></i> is strictly a water-melon; but I have rendered it "pumpkin," to preserve the English idiom, "pumpkinhead" being our equivalent for the Italian "melon," used in the sense of dullard, noodle.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_406_408" name="Footnote_406_408"/><a href="#FNanchor_406_408"><span class="label">[406]</span></a> According to the commentators, "baptized on a Sunday" anciently signified a simpleton, because salt (which is constantly used by the Italian classical writers as a synonym for wit or sense) was not sold on Sundays.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_407_409" name="Footnote_407_409"/><a href="#FNanchor_407_409"><span class="label">[407]</span></a> Syn. confusedly (<i><span lang="it">frastagliatamente</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_408_410" name="Footnote_408_410"/><a href="#FNanchor_408_410"><span class="label">[408]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">La Contessa di Civillari</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> the public sewers. Civillari, according to the commentators, was the name of an alley in Florence, where all the ordure and filth of the neighbourhood was deposited and stored in trenches for manure.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_409_411" name="Footnote_409_411"/><a href="#FNanchor_409_411"><span class="label">[409]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Nacchere</span></i>, syn. a loud crack of wind.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_410_412" name="Footnote_410_412"/><a href="#FNanchor_410_412"><span class="label">[410]</span></a> Syn. smelt (<i><span lang="it">sentito</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_411_413" name="Footnote_411_413"/><a href="#FNanchor_411_413"><span class="label">[411]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Laterina</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> Latrina.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_412_414" name="Footnote_412_414"/><a href="#FNanchor_412_414"><span class="label">[412]</span></a> Lit. Broom-handle (<i><span lang="it">Manico della Scopa</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_413_415" name="Footnote_413_415"/><a href="#FNanchor_413_415"><span class="label">[413]</span></a> Lit. "do <i>yourself</i> a mischief, without doing <i>us</i> any good"; but the sequel shows that the contrary is meant, as in the text.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_414_416" name="Footnote_414_416"/><a href="#FNanchor_414_416"><span class="label">[414]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> what he is worth.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_415_417" name="Footnote_415_417"/><a href="#FNanchor_415_417"><span class="label">[415]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Bucherame</span>.</i> The word "buckram" was anciently applied to the finest linen cloth, as is apparently the case here; see Ducange, <span lang="la">voce</span> <i><span lang="la">Boquerannus</span></i>, and Florio, <span lang="la">voce</span> <i><span lang="it">Bucherame</span></i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_416_418" name="Footnote_416_418"/><a href="#FNanchor_416_418"><span class="label">[416]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> in needlework.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_417_419" name="Footnote_417_419"/><a href="#FNanchor_417_419"><span class="label">[417]</span></a> "It was the custom in those days to attach to the bedposts sundry small instruments in the form of birds, which, by means of certain mechanical devices, gave forth sounds modulated like the song of actual birds."—<i>Fanfani.</i></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_418_420" name="Footnote_418_420"/><a href="#FNanchor_418_420"><span class="label">[418]</span></a> Syn. that which belongeth to us (<i><span lang="it">ciò che ci è</span></i>,) <i><span lang="it">ci</span></i>, as I have before noted, signifying both "here" and "us," dative and accusative.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_419_421" name="Footnote_419_421"/><a href="#FNanchor_419_421"><span class="label">[419]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> procure bills of exchange for.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_420_422" name="Footnote_420_422"/><a href="#FNanchor_420_422"><span class="label">[420]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> we must see what is to be done.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_421_423" name="Footnote_421_423"/><a href="#FNanchor_421_423"><span class="label">[421]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> having executed and exchanged the necessary legal documents for the proper carrying out of the transaction and completed the matter to their mutual satisfaction.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_422_424" name="Footnote_422_424"/><a href="#FNanchor_422_424"><span class="label">[422]</span></a> The song sung by Pamfilo (under which name, as I have before pointed out, the author appears to represent himself) apparently alludes to Boccaccio's amours with the Princess Maria of Naples (Fiammetta), by whom his passion was returned in kind.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_423_425" name="Footnote_423_425"/><a href="#FNanchor_423_425"><span class="label">[423]</span></a> According to the Ptolemaic system, the earth is encompassed by eight celestial zones or heavens; the first or highest, above which is the empyrean, (otherwise called the ninth heaven,) is that of the Moon, the second that of Mercury, the third that of Venus, the fourth that of the Sun, the fifth that of Mars, the sixth that of Jupiter, the seventh that of Saturn and the eighth or lowest that of the fixed stars and of the Earth.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_424_426" name="Footnote_424_426"/><a href="#FNanchor_424_426"><span class="label">[424]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">D'azzurrino in color cilestro</span>.</i> This is one of the many passages in which Boccaccio has imitated Dante (cf. <span lang="it">Purgatorio</span>, c. xxvi. II. 4-6, "<span lang="it">... il sole.... Che già, raggiando, tutto l'occidente Mutava in bianco aspetto di cilestro</span>,") and also one of the innumerable instances in which former translators (who all agree in making the advent of the light change the colour of the sky from azure to a darker colour, instead of, as Boccaccio intended, to watchet, <i>i.e.</i> a paler or greyish blue,) have misrendered the text, for sheer ignorance of the author's meaning.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_425_427" name="Footnote_425_427"/><a href="#FNanchor_425_427"><span class="label">[425]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Scannadio</span></i> signifies "Murder-God" and was no doubt a nickname bestowed upon the dead man, on account of his wicked and reprobate way of life.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_426_428" name="Footnote_426_428"/><a href="#FNanchor_426_428"><span class="label">[426]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> balls for a pellet bow, usually made out of clay. Bruno and Buffalmacco were punning upon the double meaning, land and earth (or clay), of the word <i><span lang="it">terra</span></i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_427_429" name="Footnote_427_429"/><a href="#FNanchor_427_429"><span class="label">[427]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Scimmione</span></i> (lit. ape), a contemptuous distortion of <i><span lang="it">Simone</span></i>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_428_430" name="Footnote_428_430"/><a href="#FNanchor_428_430"><span class="label">[428]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Chiarea</span>.</i> According to the commentators, the composition of this drink is unknown, but that of clary, a sort of hippocras or spiced wine <i>clear-strained</i> (whence the name), offers no difficulty to the student of old English literature.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_429_431" name="Footnote_429_431"/><a href="#FNanchor_429_431"><span class="label">[429]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the doublet.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_430_432" name="Footnote_430_432"/><a href="#FNanchor_430_432"><span class="label">[430]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> do me a double injury.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_431_433" name="Footnote_431_433"/><a href="#FNanchor_431_433"><span class="label">[431]</span></a> Syn. goodly design of foresight (<i><span lang="it">buono avviso</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_432_434" name="Footnote_432_434"/><a href="#FNanchor_432_434"><span class="label">[432]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Giovani di tromba marina</span>.</i> The sense seems as above; the commentators say that <i><span lang="it">giovani di tromba marina</span></i> is a name given to those youths who go trumpeting about everywhere the favours accorded them by women; but the <i><span lang="it">tromba marina</span></i> is a <i>stringed</i> (not a wind) <i>instrument</i>, a sort of primitive violoncello with one string.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_433_435" name="Footnote_433_435"/><a href="#FNanchor_433_435"><span class="label">[433]</span></a> "Your teeth did dance like virginal jacks."—<i>Ben Jonson.</i></p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_434_436" name="Footnote_434_436"/><a href="#FNanchor_434_436"><span class="label">[434]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Adagiarono</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> unsaddled and stabled and fed them.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_435_437" name="Footnote_435_437"/><a href="#FNanchor_435_437"><span class="label">[435]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> hog.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_436_438" name="Footnote_436_438"/><a href="#FNanchor_436_438"><span class="label">[436]</span></a> Lit. a backbiter (<i><span lang="it">morditore</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_437_439" name="Footnote_437_439"/><a href="#FNanchor_437_439"><span class="label">[437]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> conjured him by God to make peace with him.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_438_440" name="Footnote_438_440"/><a href="#FNanchor_438_440"><span class="label">[438]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> from a serious or moral point of view.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_439_441" name="Footnote_439_441"/><a href="#FNanchor_439_441"><span class="label">[439]</span></a> Apparently Laodicea (<i>hod.</i> Eskihissar) in Anatolia, from which a traveller, taking the direct land route, would necessarily pass Antioch (<i>hod.</i> Antakhia) on his way to Jerusalem.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_440_442" name="Footnote_440_442"/><a href="#FNanchor_440_442"><span class="label">[440]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> <span lang="la">arrectus est penis ejus</span>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_441_443" name="Footnote_441_443"/><a href="#FNanchor_441_443"><span class="label">[441]</span></a> See p. <a href="#Page_372">372</a>, note.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_442_444" name="Footnote_442_444"/><a href="#FNanchor_442_444"><span class="label">[442]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> fortune.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_443_445" name="Footnote_443_445"/><a href="#FNanchor_443_445"><span class="label">[443]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Cattajo</span>.</i> This word is usually translated Cathay, <i>i.e.</i> China; but <i><span lang="fr">semble</span></i> Boccaccio meant rather the Dalmatian province of Cattaro, which would better answer the description in the text, Nathan's estate being described as adjoining a highway leading from the Ponant (or Western shores of the Mediterranean) to the Levant (or Eastern shores), <i>e.g.</i> the road from Cattaro on the Adriatic to Salonica on the Ægean. Cathay (China) seems, from the circumstances of the case, out of the question, as is also the Italian town called Cattaio, near Padua.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_444_446" name="Footnote_444_446"/><a href="#FNanchor_444_446"><span class="label">[444]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to show the most extravagant hospitality.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_445_447" name="Footnote_445_447"/><a href="#FNanchor_445_447"><span class="label">[445]</span></a> Or as we should say, "After much beating about the bush."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_446_448" name="Footnote_446_448"/><a href="#FNanchor_446_448"><span class="label">[446]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> jealousies.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_447_449" name="Footnote_447_449"/><a href="#FNanchor_447_449"><span class="label">[447]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> all sections of the given theme.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_448_450" name="Footnote_448_450"/><a href="#FNanchor_448_450"><span class="label">[448]</span></a> Lit. accident (<i><span lang="it">accidente</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_449_451" name="Footnote_449_451"/><a href="#FNanchor_449_451"><span class="label">[449]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> with news of her life.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_450_452" name="Footnote_450_452"/><a href="#FNanchor_450_452"><span class="label">[450]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Dubbio</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> a doubtful case or question.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_451_453" name="Footnote_451_453"/><a href="#FNanchor_451_453"><span class="label">[451]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> who would have recognized her as Madam Catalina.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_452_454" name="Footnote_452_454"/><a href="#FNanchor_452_454"><span class="label">[452]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Compassione</span></i>, <i>i.e.</i> emotion.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_453_455" name="Footnote_453_455"/><a href="#FNanchor_453_455"><span class="label">[453]</span></a> Lit. I leave you free <i>of</i> Niccoluccio (<i><span lang="it">libera vi lascio di Niccoluccio</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_454_456" name="Footnote_454_456"/><a href="#FNanchor_454_456"><span class="label">[454]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> Ansaldo, Dianora and the nigromancer.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_455_457" name="Footnote_455_457"/><a href="#FNanchor_455_457"><span class="label">[455]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the money promised him by way of recompense.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_456_458" name="Footnote_456_458"/><a href="#FNanchor_456_458"><span class="label">[456]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i>, nicety, minuteness (<i><span lang="it">strettezza</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_457_459" name="Footnote_457_459"/><a href="#FNanchor_457_459"><span class="label">[457]</span></a> A town on the Bay of Naples, near the ruins of Pompeii.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_458_460" name="Footnote_458_460"/><a href="#FNanchor_458_460"><span class="label">[458]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Per amore amiate</span></i> (Fr. <span lang="fr">aimiez par amour</span>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_459_461" name="Footnote_459_461"/><a href="#FNanchor_459_461"><span class="label">[459]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">In si forte punto</span></i>, or, in modern parlance, at so critical or ill-starred a moment.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_460_462" name="Footnote_460_462"/><a href="#FNanchor_460_462"><span class="label">[460]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Sollevata</span></i>, syn. solaced, relieved or (3) agitated, troubled.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_461_463" name="Footnote_461_463"/><a href="#FNanchor_461_463"><span class="label">[461]</span></a> Sic, <i>Publio Quinzio Fulvo</i>; but <i><span lang="la">quære</span></i> should it not rather be <i>Publio Quinto Fulvio</i>, <i>i.e.</i> Publius Quintus Fulvius, a form of the name which seems more in accordance with the genius of the Latin language?</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_462_464" name="Footnote_462_464"/><a href="#FNanchor_462_464"><span class="label">[462]</span></a> Or "his" (<i><span lang="it">a sè</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_463_465" name="Footnote_463_465"/><a href="#FNanchor_463_465"><span class="label">[463]</span></a> Or "thine" (<i><span lang="it">a te</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_464_466" name="Footnote_464_466"/><a href="#FNanchor_464_466"><span class="label">[464]</span></a> Lit. "hope" (<i><span lang="it">sperare</span></i>). See note, p. <a href="#Page_5">5</a>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_465_467" name="Footnote_465_467"/><a href="#FNanchor_465_467"><span class="label">[465]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> I would have her in common with thee.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_466_468" name="Footnote_466_468"/><a href="#FNanchor_466_468"><span class="label">[466]</span></a> Or "arguments" (<i><span lang="it">consigli</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_467_469" name="Footnote_467_469"/><a href="#FNanchor_467_469"><span class="label">[467]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> of your counsel.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_468_470" name="Footnote_468_470"/><a href="#FNanchor_468_470"><span class="label">[468]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> my riches are not the result of covetous amassing, but of the favours of fortune.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_469_471" name="Footnote_469_471"/><a href="#FNanchor_469_471"><span class="label">[469]</span></a> Sic (<i><span lang="it">tiepidezza</span></i>); but <i><span lang="fr">semble</span></i> "timidity" or "distrustfulness" is meant.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_470_472" name="Footnote_470_472"/><a href="#FNanchor_470_472"><span class="label">[470]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> perils.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_471_473" name="Footnote_471_473"/><a href="#FNanchor_471_473"><span class="label">[471]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to cross the Alps into France.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_472_474" name="Footnote_472_474"/><a href="#FNanchor_472_474"><span class="label">[472]</span></a> <i><span lang="it">Adagiarono</span></i>; see p. <a href="#Page_447">447</a>, note.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_473_475" name="Footnote_473_475"/><a href="#FNanchor_473_475"><span class="label">[473]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> to place themselves according to their several ranks, which were unknown to Torello.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_474_476" name="Footnote_474_476"/><a href="#FNanchor_474_476"><span class="label">[474]</span></a> Sic (<i><span lang="it">la vostra credenza raffermeremo</span></i>); but the meaning is, "whereby we may amend your unbelief and give you cause to credit our assertion that we are merchants."</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_475_477" name="Footnote_475_477"/><a href="#FNanchor_475_477"><span class="label">[475]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> should any rumour get wind of death.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_476_478" name="Footnote_476_478"/><a href="#FNanchor_476_478"><span class="label">[476]</span></a> Sic (<i><span lang="it">all' altro esercito</span></i>). The meaning of this does not appear, as no mention has yet been made of two Christian armies. Perhaps we should translate "the rest of the army," <i>i.e.</i> such part of the remnant of the Christian host as fled to Acre and shut themselves up there after the disastrous day of Hittin (23 June, 1187). Acre fell on the 29th July, 1187.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_477_479" name="Footnote_477_479"/><a href="#FNanchor_477_479"><span class="label">[477]</span></a> It may be well to remind the European reader that the turban consists of two parts, <i>i.e.</i> a skull-cap and a linen cloth, which is wound round it in various folds and shapes, to form the well-known Eastern head-dress.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_478_480" name="Footnote_478_480"/><a href="#FNanchor_478_480"><span class="label">[478]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> he who was to have married Madam Adalieta.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_479_481" name="Footnote_479_481"/><a href="#FNanchor_479_481"><span class="label">[479]</span></a> See p. <a href="#Page_325">325</a>.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_480_482" name="Footnote_480_482"/><a href="#FNanchor_480_482"><span class="label">[480]</span></a> Or "strange" (<i><span lang="it">nuovo</span></i>); see ante, passim.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_481_483" name="Footnote_481_483"/><a href="#FNanchor_481_483"><span class="label">[481]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> his vassals.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_482_484" name="Footnote_482_484"/><a href="#FNanchor_482_484"><span class="label">[482]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> the husband of his kinswoman aforesaid.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_483_485" name="Footnote_483_485"/><a href="#FNanchor_483_485"><span class="label">[483]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> unwetted with tears.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_484_486" name="Footnote_484_486"/><a href="#FNanchor_484_486"><span class="label">[484]</span></a> <i>i.e.</i> of overmuch licence.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_485_487" name="Footnote_485_487"/><a href="#FNanchor_485_487"><span class="label">[485]</span></a> Two noted wine-bidders of the time.</p>
			</div>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p><a id="Footnote_486_488" name="Footnote_486_488"/><a href="#FNanchor_486_488"><span class="label">[486]</span></a> Lit. living folk (<i><span lang="it">viventi</span></i>).</p>
			</div>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
